
					
			
			
				
				
			
			 
			
			
The Institute on Digital Archaeology Method & Practice
Funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities and organized by Michigan State University’s Department of Anthropology and MATRIX: The Center for Digital Humanities and Social Sciences, the Institute on Digital Archaeology Method & Practice will bring together archaeologists and closely associated scholars interested in developing critical, hands-on skills in digital method and practice.  Taking place on the campus of Michigan State University in 2015 (August 17-22) & 2016 (August 15-20), the institute will provide invited participants with training in key digital methods and challenge them to envision, build, and deploy a digital archaeological project over the course of the institute.

		 
			
				
				
			
			LEARN MORE
		
		 
		 
			
		 
			
			
				
				
			
			
			
About the Institute
Taking place on the campus of Michigan State University in 2015 (August 17-22) & 2016 (August 15-20), the institute will provide invited participants with hands-on training in key digital archaeological methods.  The institute will also challenge invited attendees to envision, build, and launch a significant digital archaeological project by the end of the institute.

		 
		 
		 
			
			
			
				
				LEARN
				
The institute will include lectures, hands-on workshops, discussion groups, and collaborative development sessions covering key digital archaeology tools, topics, and methods – all led by a group of highly respected faculty from both inside and outside of the archaeological community.

			 
		 
		 
			
			
				
				COLLABORATE
				
Emphasis will be placed on the highly collaborative nature of digital archaeological method & practice.  Attendees will work with each other on small-scale, rapid development projects throughout the institute. Attendees will also have the opportunity to collaborate with each another or external colleagues on their capstone project.

			 
		 
		 
			
			
				
				BUILD
				
While participants will attend lectures, participate in hands-on workshops, and collaborate on small scale rapid development projects, the organizational focus is on a significant digital archaeology capstone project which attendees will be challenged to envision, design, develop, and launch during the institute.

			 
		 
		 
		 
			
			
			
				
				
			
			LEARN MORE
		
		 
		 
			
		 
			
			
				
				
			
			
			
		Institute Applications Now Closed – Next Steps
			
			by Ethan Watrall | Feb 15, 2015 | Institute News & Updates, UpdatesWell, its official folks – the application deadline for the NEH funded Institute for Digital Archaeology Method and Practice has passed.  Quite honestly, we’re blown away by the amount of interest the institute has received.  We received 187 applications...		
		 
		 
		 
			
			
			
				
				
			
			SEE MORE NEWS
		
		 
		 
			
		 
			
			
				
				
			
			
		 
			
		 
			
		 
		 
			
			
			
Header image 2013-03-29-0898.jpg By Djidiouf is licensed under CC BY 2.0

		 
		 
		 
			
		 
					
