 These days, in the Canadian academic community, you hear a lot about collaboration and knowledge mobilization. This is probably because these are key aspects of SSHRC’s strategy for community engagement, but the need to push our ideas out from the campus to the community is very close to my heart, and one of the ways I try to encourage this is through organizing monthly meetings of a Digital Humanities Off Campus group. We’ve had some really good discussions about DH: the future of the humanities, how to use technology in teaching, how to manage DH projects, and how to communicate with the public. Because we’re nearing the holiday season, our final meeting of DHOC will be a little more light hearted, but probably just as useful (if not more so) to those who are looking for future collaborations, or simply to be more aware of the DH initiatives taking place in London. The plan for the night is as follows: Speed Networking Organized like a speed dating event, but with no romantic illusions, the first half of the evening will see random pairings of participants that will switch every five minutes. In that short time period, you both have to introduce yourself and talk a bit about what you do, and then come up with a project that you could work on together that will showcase both your interests and skills. By the time an hour flies by, you’ve talked to 12 people about your work, and, even, if they are silly, you’ve come up with 12 new ideas for collaborating on a project! Bring Your Own Tool For this event, everyone is asked to think of a tool (digital if possible, but not necessarily) that they use in their work. If it is possible to bring the tool (or a laptop for demonstration) that’s great, but a description of the tool will do just fine. Everyone will find a partner and discuss these tools with them: encouraging questions about the tools, and exploration or demonstration if the tools are unknown to your partner. After 20 minutes of chatter, we’ll have a few volunteers explain their partners’ tool, and a way in which they might use it in their own research, to the rest of us. This event is a great opportunity for newcomers to DHOC to join in – they’ll have a chance to meet everyone face to face – so if you know someone that’s been thinking of coming along, invite them! And just to clarify – there is no need to prepare for this event, its all in good fun, and a intended so everyone can chat about their work in a relaxed, supportive environment. Looking forward to seeing everyone on Thursday, and for those that can’t make it: Happy Holidays!      
