Studying for my comprehensive exam Finishing two book reviews Finishing a conference presentation Working with Josh on a new course management system using Wordpress and some stand-alone plugins for blogging educators. Studying for my comprehensive exam Preparing for the upcoming history carnival (keep sending in nominations!) Writing a proposal for the Nebraska Digital Workshop Studying for my comprehensive exam Finishing my minor field statements Sprucing up this site for the upcoming CSS Reboot Studying for my comprehensive exam Preparing for a course (History 120) I'm teaching this fall. This has been, by far, the busiest semester I've had in my academic career, no thanks to myself. Working full-time at CHNM has been a significant adjustment. I feel very fortunate, though, because I honestly and genuinely love going to work every day. Everything you've heard about CHNM is absolutely true. A humanities student with an interest in web development and new media could not ask for a better place to work. If you haven't seen it yet, we just opened Gulag: Many Days, Many Lives with its first exhibit Gulag: Soviet Forced Labor Camps and the Struggle for Freedom. "Soviet Forced Labor Camps" is an online exhibit we created in partnership with the National Park Service, who has a traveling exhibit on the Soviet Gulag. More great stuff from CHNM is, as always, in the works.  For the Nebraska Digital Workshop, I'd like to propose something on microformats for historians. I've recently become interested in microformats, thanks to Josh and Tom and from reading the microformats site. I'd like to proposal several microformats that historians can use, for both primary sources and secondary literature (scholarship, teaching guides, etc.). This weaves into my general interest in how we can better mark-up history-related documents in general. The more I work with HTML and XHTML, the more I realize how limited the languages are when confronted with documents that don't necessarily fit modern publishing conventions. Heck, HTML and XHTML don't often fit modern publishing conventions. This makes me all-the-more determined to convince people that proper, semantic markup for documents is essential. I'm looking for a variety of documents, primary and secondary, as examples for my proposal, so if you know any good ones please send them along.  Additionally, I found out that my poster session proposal for the 2007 AHA conference was accepted. So, I'll be in Atlanta in January. I've got a few ideas brewing for that (thanks to Paula (who got me into this in the first place), but I was wondering if anyone out there has suggestions for making a great poster and doing a solid poster presentation. One thing I plan to do is make a video podcast of my poster presentation and put it on this site somewhere. Any other ideas?  In other news:  Dad recently turned 50! I'm going to be an uncle! My brother Justin and his wife are have a baby! George Mason University had its very first history PhD awarded. Congratulations Andrew! Totally forgot to mention this: The very talented Allison O'Connor, another history PhD student at George Mason and colleague at CHNM, has a blog called EHearth. I share my office with Allison, and I've joked that since we started working together, I've learned a new Photoshop technique or tool at least once a week. Maybe not that often, but I've certainly learned a lot from her. I plan to be lurking around a few sessions at the OAH conference at the end of this week. The session on alcoholism in U.S. history seems particularly interesting, but I'll mostly attend the sessions that focus on teaching, just to help prepare for my History 120 course. Paula's taking a few of us to the Hagley Museum and Library in the middle of May to get acquainted with their collections. Should be fun! Our webmaster, Amanda Shuman, will be leaving to pursue her PhD in Chinese history at the University of California-Santa Cruz. Congrats Amanda! Stephanie has a totally awesome dissertation topic.   [XHTML]: Extensible Hypertext Markup Language   [HTML]: Hypertext Markup Language   [AHA]: American Historical Association   [CHNM]: Center for History and New Media   *[OAH]: Organization of American Historians
