It's that time again...the History Carnival! We've got a great crop of posts this time, so enjoy!  Fun and Games  Sepoy at Chapati Mystery provides us with an interesting account of dice and board games in Of Dice and Men  Sheila at Relaxing on the Bayou wrote Early Visual Media, which critiques a nice site on, you guessed it, early visual media, specifically from the 17th and 18th centuries  Pratie Place has a great post called Switched-on Bach, which takes a look at the development of the synthesizer, which was invented by Robert Moog in the 1920s.  Twentieth-Century Imagery  I don't speak French (I really don't speak English well, but that's a different story), but Pita from Rhone Alpes, France has three blogs that feature some fascinating images:  des chapeaux Agence eureka grenouille plus The vast majority of the posts feature images only, so you don't need to know French to appreciate them (the larger scans are really nice). But if anyone wants to translate specific posts and point them out to me I'd appreciate it!  The Vices and Virtues of the Department Store  Natalie Bennett at Philobiblon suspect that The Man to Ultimately Blame for Wal-Mart was William Whiteley, a 19th-century London department store owner. I sympathize, Natalie.  In contrast, Anthony Buccino at Uncle Tonoose takes a trip back to his childhood in Busy as Bamberger's on a Saturday Morning. The picture on Anthony's post is great.  Ancient, Medieval, and Early Modern History  Jim Davilia at PaleoJudaica recounts the eruption of Mount Vesuvius.  At Giornale Nuovo (Ilove this site's logo), A True Account of What HappenÇƒÙd in the Kingdom of Sweden provides a stimulating introduction to Joseph Glanvill's True Account of What HappenÇƒÙd in the Kingdom of Sweden In the Years 1669, 1670, and upwards: In Relation to some Persons that were accused for Witches; and Tryed and Executed By the KingÇƒÙs Command  Richard Nokes at Unlocked Wordhoard writes The Oddity of Privacy, which asks about the origins of privacy.  Michael NcNeil at Impearls writes The Invention of Nothing, which explores the origins of the number zero.  At Locusts & Honey, William Adolphe Bouguereau, 1825-1905 commemorates the death of Burguereau.  Philobiblon has another great post on A Forgotten Humanitarian named Sir Benjamin Hammett and his efforts to alter "the Sentence of burning Women."  The Horrors of "Cleansing"  Otto Pohl at Otto's Random Thoughts provides a gripping post on Creating a Whites Only Soviet Far East, which recounts the 21 August 1937 ethnic cleansing initiated by the Soviets against Koreans in far eastern Soviet regions. Lest We Forget: Los Desaparecidos of Argentina 1976-1983 is an account of the atrocities committed by Argentinian president Jorge Rafael Videla against dissenters.  Death and Violence  In Death Where is Thy Sting?, Barista provides a intriguing account of funeral practices in Britain.  Sharon at Early Modern Notes gives us a detailed account of her summer research work in Thinking about Duels and Violent Gentlemen.  Historical Method  At Spinning Clio, Marc Comtios gives us a five-part series entitled Introduction to Historical Method.  In Late night poderings of a graduate student, Sameer at Historio-blogography provides us with an interesting "brain dump". Sylwester Ratowt at Copernicus Sashimi responds to Sameer with Cognitive History.  Reviews  Grumpy Old Bookman gives us a nice book review in his post John Carey: The Intellectuals and the Masses.  Next Time:  The next host will be on September 15. Orac at Respectful Insolence will play host. Email submission to orac_usa AT hotmail DOT com, and be sure to use "history carnival" in the subject heading.  Truth Laid Bear
