EugenicsArchive.Org, created by the Dolan DNA Learning Center, boasts over 2200 items in its online archive and virtual exhibit. Ranging from the full text of Charles Davenport's treatise, Eugenics: The Science of Human Improvement by Better Breeding, to detailed images of student notes and field work, the items in EugenicsArchive.Org reveal the cold scientific idealism and undeniable prejudice of eugenics. While the site's weakness lie in the limited usability and poor design of its virtual exhibits, the site's primary strength lies in the archiving and access to primary source material.  The ten virtual exhibits can be viewed in a text-only HTML version  or a Flash-driven version. While the Flash version has the potential to offer a rich experience, it falls quite short in usability and utility. The default size of the popup windows (for Firefox on my Mac) creates small, almost illegible text. Because of the inability to control the font size in your browser, the only way to change the font-size is to increase the popup window size. It's a step that, while not difficult, can be tedious for a user. The HTML versions are a better choice with regards to usability. Both versions are essentially the same essay, but the Flash version includes images while the HTML version does not.  It seems strange that the site's creators did not include the same images in the HTML version (or, at the very least, links to the images) as they did in the Flash version. They would be easy to include either by footnote or by direct link to the documents in the archive.  Once you get past these usability hurdles, the essays themselves are, for the most part, quite good. I think they could do a much better job integrating the primary source material into the essays. Including 3-4 images per section is trifling compared to the hundreds of documents available on the site.  The site's archive can be used in three ways: by keyword search, by image number search, and by topic. There are 31 topics to browse, including Immigration, agriculture genetics, Mendelian heredity, and Poverty and Degeneracy . Each topic contains a brief (200-word) description of that topic and a list of thumbnail images that, when clicked, open in a new window to reveal a larger image of the document. The individual document window contains source information, date of the document being shown, and copyright information. In nice fashion, the site's developers have included "text-only" versions of images of letters, books, and other text-based documents. Because the site uses Javascript to generate a pop-up window to display the details of the archive documents, it's slightly annoying to find the URL of the document to link directly to it and to cite it in any footnote or other form. Again, using Control+Click (Mac) or right-click (Windowns) will allow users to copy the link's address and then paste it into a new browser window.  Educators and researchers familiar enough with the history of eugenics would do well with this site. The site offers a potentially rich learning experience for students, with structured guidance from an instructor in finding and critically reading the source material, techniques which the site does not address. The site's design and usability is questionable, but the materials available on the site make a visit very worthwhile.
