Since I've been absent from my blog for about two week I thought I'd provide a brief look back at what's been going on.  I've been sick since this past Monday. I think I'm almost over it now, but this morning I sneezed so hard that I strained a muscle in my neck. I didn't like doing that.  The Echo redesign is almost ready to go live. I'll put a link to the redesign once it's up and running. I did a little design work on it, very little compared to all the hard (and absolutely fantastic) work that Josh Greenberg, Joan Fragazy, and Rikk Mulligan, among others, have done. My little icons and meager icons for the site are nothing compared to what they've done. Great job!  I promise I'm almost done with the Webography site. It's just little things, like styling tables, moving the PHP around to fit the design, and making the pages as close to being XHTML and CSS valid as humanly possible.  With my Documentary final project almost finished, I'll be able to spend more time on my research for my Doctoral Research Seminar coming in the spring. The final version of my documentary goes live this coming Wednesday, so stay tuned.  Along with my blog writing, my blog reading has been on standby for a few weeks. Some of the highlights I've missed, but I'm sure you've already seen:  Caleb's "Notes for a Philosophy of Teaching" has had me thinking about my own philosophy on teaching. More on that soon...I promise. Sharon at Early Modern Notes discusses Paula Petrik's student blogs in History 120. Jason Kottke discusses RSS Advertising. Eric Meyer has a new version of S5, version 1.1b1. There have been so many changes to this since I last checked in that I'll need to go back through all the version to see what's been happening, but it's a great project. One of my long-term goals is to create online presentations for all of my (future) lectures, freely available online. S5 will help me do it. Speak Up takes a look at all the ways Ken Jennings penned his name on Jeopardy! during his tenure. Then, of course, I need to read today's offerings.    [XHTML]: eXtensible Hypertext Markup Language   [PHP]: Hypertext Pre-Processor   *[CSS]: Cascading Style Sheets
