Please join the GC Digital Initiatives, the GC Digital Fellows, the PhDÂ program in Computer Science and the CUNY Digital Humanities InitiativeÂ in welcoming Dr. Gerald J Sussman, who will present on the problemsÂ created by intelligent agents whose governing are purposefully obscuredÂ but whose actions are designed to benefit or harm humans. Gerald Jay Sussman This event will take place Tuesday, March 24th, at 6pm in the Mina ReesÂ Library Concourse (C.197) at the Graduate Center, CUNY. This event willÂ be live tweeted (follow @cunydhi and use #cunydhi). Recently there has been a new round of concern about the possibilityÂ that Artificial Intelligence (AI) could get out of control and becomeÂ an existential threat to humanity.”Â With the recentÂ explosive application of AI technology we are faced with a problem: aÂ technology so powerful and pervasive whose benefits accrue to privateÂ entities (Microsoft, Oracle, Google, facebook, Cigna, FICO, JP MorganÂ and Goldman Sachs) yet with both unexamined and unregulated consequencesÂ for private citizens. How can we ensure that applications of this technology are constrainedÂ to provide benefits without excessive risk of harm? This is primarily aÂ social, political, and economic issue, there are also significantÂ technical challenges that we should address. Sussman argues that intelligent agents must be able to explain theirÂ decisions and actions with stories that can be understood by otherÂ intelligent agents, including humans. Sussman goes further, adding thatÂ these programs must be capable of being held accountable for thoseÂ activities in adversarial proceedings. For citizens to have confidenceÂ in these measures the software base for such agents must be open andÂ free to be examined by all and modified, if necessary, to enhance goodÂ behaviors and to ameliorate harmful behaviors. Biographical sketch of Gerald Jay Sussman Gerald Jay Sussman is the Panasonic (formerly Matsushita) Professor ofÂ Electrical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. HeÂ received the S.B. and the Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from theÂ Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1968 and 1973, respectively. HeÂ has been involved in artificial intelligence research at M.I.T. sinceÂ 1964. Sussman’s contributions to Artificial Intelligence include problemÂ solving by debugging almost-right plans and various language structuresÂ for expressing problem-solving strategies. His work with RichardÂ Stallman developed propagation of constraints for application toÂ electrical circuit analysis and synthesis, and dependency-basedÂ explanation and backtracking. Sussman and his former student, GuyÂ L. Steele Jr., invented the Scheme programming language in 1975. Sussman pioneered the use of computational descriptions toÂ communicate methodological ideas in teaching subjects in ElectricalÂ Circuits and in Signals and Systems. Over the past decade Sussman andÂ Jack Wisdom Â worked across disciplines to develope a subject that uses computational techniquesÂ to communicate a deeper understanding of advanced ClassicalÂ Mechanics. The task of formulating a method as a computer-executableÂ program and debugging that program is a powerful exercise in theÂ learning process. Also, once formalized procedurally, a mathematicalÂ idea becomes a tool that can be used directly to computeÂ results. Sussman and Wisdom, with Meinhard Mayer, have produced aÂ textbook, “Structure and Interpretation of Classical Mechanics,” toÂ capture these novel ideas. Sussman is a coauthor (with Hal Abelson and Julie Sussman) of theÂ introductory computer science textbook used at MIT and many otherÂ universities. The textbook, “Structure and Interpretation of ComputerÂ Programs,” has been translated into French, German, Chinese, Polish, andÂ Japanese. As a result of this and other contributions toÂ computer-science education, Sussman received the ACM’s Karl KarlstromÂ Outstanding Educator Award in 1990, and the Amar G. Bose award forÂ teaching in 1992. Sussman is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and ElectronicsÂ Engineers (IEEE). He is a member of the National Academy of EngineeringÂ (NAE), a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement ofÂ Science (AAAS), a fellow of the Association for the Advancement ofÂ Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), a fellow of the Association forÂ Computing Machinery (ACM), a fellow of the American Academy of Arts andÂ Sciences, and a fellow of the New York Academy of SciencesÂ (NYAS). Sussman is a founding director of the Free Software Foundation.
