 Please join the CUNY Digital Humanities Initiative, the English Program, and the Futures Initiative in welcoming Dr. Jennifer Guiliano, who will lead a grant writing workshop specifically aimed towards scholars working in the humanities. This event will take place Friday, April 24th, at 2pm in the English Program Lounge (4406) at the Graduate Center, CUNY. RSVP recommended:  https://www.eventbrite.com/e/grant-writing-for-humanists-tickets-16105258261. Designed for humanities scholars seeking assistance with writing grants, this workshop introduces participants to best practices in writing and submitting a grant. This workshop will allow participants to work through key grant writing concepts, understand the process of developing successful grants, and allow them the opportunity to engage with a series of online resources, including presentations, exemplar successful grants, and podcasts that will position them to be successful in their grant-writing. A combination of lecture and hands-on, the workshop will result in a map for attendees to follow to complete their first (or improve their existing) grant. Recommended: BYODevices and abstracts or materials for your current project. Collaborative projects welcome! Jennifer Guiliano is Assistant Professor in the Department of History at the Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis. She has served as a Post-Doctoral Research Assistant and Program Manager at the Institute for Computing in Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (2008-2010) and as Associate Director of the Center for Digital Humanities (2010-2011) and Research Assistant Professor in the Department of History at the University of South Carolina. She most recently held a position as Assistant Director at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities at the University of Maryland where she also served as an adjunct instructor in the Department of History and the Digital Cultures program in the Honor’s College. Dr. Guiliano currently serves on the Association for Computing in the Humanities (ACH) Executive Council (2013-2016), as co-director with Trevor Muñoz of the Humanities Intensive Teaching + Learning Initiative (HILT), and as co-author with Simon Appleford of DevDH.org, a resource for digital humanities project development, and Getting Started in Digital Humanities (forthcoming, Wiley & Sons, 2016). She is also author of Indian Spectacle: College Mascots and the Anxiety of Modern America (Rutgers University Press, March 2015). 
