Joined by new podcast irregular Audrey Watters, educational technology writer for ReadWriteWeb, the Digital Campus crew discusses a whole passel o’ news for this episode. Dan Cohen gives us an eyewitness report from the first meeting of the Digital Public Library of America initiative, identifying three (only three?) chief tensions: how “public” and how “American” such a library could be; how centralized such a library should be; and how such a library could help fulfill our national yen for free Dan Brown ebooks. Tom thinks the iPad 2 shows that Apple is a little behind the curve (cough, cough, Android), but Audrey thinks that consumers are going to prefer Apple to Android (cough, cough, apps), especially since you can get Dan Brown ebooks in the iBooks store. We do all agree that the iPad 2 is a lot more classroom-friendly than the first iPad, though. Mills gives us his take on Bill Gates’s influence on education, and promises Bill that for an educational technology grant of a mere $20 million, he won’t buy an iPad 2 after all. Finally, we claim that we don’t want UniLeaks, the WikiLeaks for higher education, to degenerate into a gossip site like Juicy Campus, but we might be lying just a little bit. Links to stories and articles mentioned in the podcast: Dan Cohen, What Scholars Want from the Digital Public Library of America David Weinberger, Questions From and For the Digital Public Library of America Amanda French, Imagine a National Digital Library: I Wonder If We Can Josh Hadro, HarperCollins Puts 26 Loan Cap on Ebook Circulations Marianne Takle, The Norwegian National Digital Library Audrey Watters, Will the iPad 2 Make the Grade for Classroom Usage? Kara Swisher, Kno Student Tablet Start Up in Talks to Sell Off Tablet Part of Business David Rapp, Internet Archive Tests New Ebook Lending Waters: In-Library, and License-Free Jeff Young, Professor’s Online Lecture Gets Lift from Bill Gates Bill Gates, How Teacher Development Could Revolutionize Our SchoolsBill Gates on Big History Marc Parry, A WikiLeaks Clone Takes On Higher Education Running time: 54:26 Download the .mp3      Joined by new podcast irregular Audrey Watters, educational technology writer for ReadWriteWeb, the Digital Campus crew discusses a whole passel o’ news for this episode. Dan Cohen gives us an eyewitness report from the first meeting of the Digital Public Library of America initiative, identifying three (only three?) chief tensions: how “public” and how “American” […] 
