Landscapes, both literal and figurative, have incredible power in structuring thought and interpretation in the humanities. The Pompeii Bibliography and Mapping Project is building a unique resource to leverage the physical landscape of Pompeii as a means to navigate and query the ancient city’s bibliographic landscape. Because Pompeii lacks both a single, searchable bibliography and a standard, up-to-date map, the creation of a resource that solves these problems and simultaneously offers new and powerful search methods will revolutionize research on the ancient city. The Pompeii Bibliography and Mapping Resource (PBMR) is a web-based research environment composed of three parts: 1. Bibliographic Database and Full-Text Document Repository, 2. Geographical Information System (GIS) and 3. User Interface. At base, the PBMR is a research tool that affords the user the ability to navigate Pompeii’s urban topography and discover an extensive account of the information about each location. The GIS component provides a powerful mapping tool that can generate custom maps for diverse user groups. Users working on a particular building can create both overview and detailed maps to illustrate their study, which could be based on information provided by the PMBR as a research tool. The most powerful use of the PBMR is as an analysis tool, allowing the user to vacillate between bibliographic analysis tools and spatial analysis tools. For example, one might search for the term “House” in the bibliography, narrow those results to houses of less than 200m2 using the GIS, and then return to the bibliography to search this subset of results for houses published in the last 30 years. Thus, the PBMR permits one to ask a series of questions and receive data-rich answers impossible to achieve in any other method. Finally, although focused on the novel means of delivering the scholarship of a particular archaeological site, the anticipated users will not be limited to the academics who study that site. Similarly, the specific content of the project – Pompeii – will not limit its application by other aspects of classics or other subjects in the humanities.
