Medieval Mediterranean Resources Many of the resources listed here will move, or be taken down, as time passes. The most effective way to find online resources for undergraduate medieval classrooms is to do a Web search. A suggested starting search term is provided for each section below, unless otherwise noted. In addition to the resources available below, the PPT from the session will be online by Jan 15. For those who were at the session, I’ve also posted a brief article that demonstrates other applied uses of of activity theory. Spatial history and GIS tools Search for “medieval history GIS” Interactive ORBIS, Stanford Digital Atlas of Roman Civilization, Harvard Frustrating interface Regnum Francorum Online Frustrating interface; limited to Western Europe Early Medieval Mapping Blog roundup of online medieval GIS work; last updated April 2012 Medieval Map Pretty, but small format means limited close-up detail; has a nice toggle between ancient kingdoms and modern nation-state boundaries Static Ian Mladjov’s Resources Relatively good images of contemporary medieval maps; includes alternative place names Internet Medieval Sourcebook’s maps page, Paul Halsall, Fordham Maps are of varying quality Map of shrines From Columbia’sTreasures of Heaven . Beautiful, but limited in scope Maps Of The Medieval Mediterranean user-created maps of varying quality The Madaba Mosaic Map Timeline tools Search for “timeline tool” Empty timeline tools CHNM Timeline Tool University-sponsored; free; not very pretty, but events are properly scaled in time and entry system is extremely functional and easy to use Timeline JS University-sponsored; free; pretty, but cannot handle large numbers of events XTimeline free; pretty, and events are properly scaled in time; entry is functional and easy to use; HOWEVER, stability is a question Dipity free; pretty, but does not display events well when timescale is longer than 25 years Tiki-Toki free account limited to single timeline Time Glider free account for undergraduates only Capzles timeline is not to scale; oriented toward embedding videos and other multimedia Read.Write.Think timeline tool entries order by input order, not by date order Prefilled timelines A Web search for “medieval timeline” brings mostly timelines that are oriented toward high-school or grade-school students. It’s therefore more useful to create timelines rather than depending on prefilled timelines. One exception is below. BBC “Ages of Treasure” Blog and exhibit-curation tools Search for “free blog site” or “online exhibit tool” Content management tools These tools provide hosting options for online student blogs and exhibits in various forms OMEKA Specifically designed for historians. Includes metadata handlers and a suite of curation tools WordPress Free, open-source blogging platform, with additional option to install full WordPress site on a personal Web site Blogger Google’s free blogging platform Tumblr A newer blogging platform oriented toward photos and multimedia, with a heavy social-media-network component Pinterest A social-media platform entirely focused on images with limited text Blogs and exhibitions in history classrooms History Harvest, curated exhibit from University of Nebraska–Lincoln This is both a professionally curated exhibit and an example of student-curated collections, making it a particularly useful example of the genre. IU, W300 Casting out Satan by Satan: The Great War, 1914-1918, artifact collection by students in Dr. Erin Corber’s classroom 182nd Infantry Regiment, included in a list of sites using OMEKA Articles on blogs and exhibitions in History Classrooms T. Mills Kelly, Teaching History in the Digital Age, esp pp 78- The “Presenting” chapter takes a slightly different approach to the learning objectives that historians have for their students, but the end results–data curation, exhibition, etc.– Taking History Personally: How Blogs Connect Students Outside the Classroom from AHA’s Perspectives on History, Jan 2008. Using Blogs in a History Classroom from TeachingHistory.org This K-12 site is a product of George Mason’s CHNM. Funded by the US Department of Education, it has a number of useful guides for using online tools that adapt well to college classrooms. Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research, Christopher Blackwell & Thomas R. Martin This article looks at the shift from undergraduate essays to online research articles in a classics-department environment Medieval exhibits online As with the pre-filled timeline tool, a Web search brings up sites geared for younger audiences. However, many museums have higher-quality curated medieval exhibits online. The latter type of exhibit is useful both as a resource for primary and secondary sources and as a guide for students who are curating their own exhibits as part of a classroom activity or course assignment. History Harvest, University of Nebraska–Lincoln This is both a professionally curated exhibit and an example of student-curated collections, making it a particularly useful example of the genre. Gothic Past: A visual archive of Gothic architecture & sculpture in Ireland A professional exhibit curated using OMEKA Treasures of Heaven, Columbia The Luttrell Psalter, British LibraryTurning The Pages exhibit (requires Microsoft SilverLight plugin) Internet Medieval Sourcebook, Paul Halsall, Fordham An example of curated text with arguments about periodization and historiography built in. Labyrinth, Georgetown Labyrinth is much less explicit about the arguments that govern its periodization and historiographic sections but it’s a great collection of texts 
