Thanks to Roger Whitson for sharing this exciting new position! The job posting is online (https://www.wsujobs.com/postings/18201) and copied below for ease. Position Information Employee Type Faculty Position Title Visiting Assistant Professor Working Title Visiting Assistant Professor Position Number 121422 College/Area College of Arts and Sciences Hiring Unit  Work Location Pullman Summary of Duties The English Department at Washington State University invites applications for a Visiting Assistant Professor in the area of Digital Humanities & Digital Scholarship as part of a grant-funded project through the University’s Center for Digital Scholarship and Curation (CDSC), a joint program between WSU’s Libraries and College of Arts and Sciences. The initial appointment begins August 16, 2015 and is subject to renewal after two years. This position offers the opportunity to work closely with both the department’s Digital Technology and Culture (DTC) Program and the Center for Digital Scholarship and Curation faculty and staff to integrate digital humanities into a high-quality interdisciplinary curriculum and to collaborate with faculty in other programs and departments to enhance WSU’s presence in digital humanities. Salary will be commensurate with qualifications and experience, along with a competitive benefits package. Additional Information Teach five undergraduate courses during the academic year. Provide workshops for students, faculty, and researchers in the CDSC. Collaborate with faculty and staff on new and ongoing grant-related programs. Commitment to both engaging collaboratively with the methods and techniques of contemporary digital scholarship. Anticipated Start Date 08/16/2015 Tenure Track No Full-Time/Part-Time Full Time Appointment Status Temporary Position Term in Months 12 Monthly Salary Commensurate with qualifications and experience Required Qualifications 1. M.A. or Ph.D. in English, Digital Humanities, or related field (degree in hand by time of appointment); 2. Evidence of ability to conduct productive research both individually and collaboratively; 3. Evidence of ability to teach successfully at the college level and mentor students from diverse backgrounds Preferred Qualifications 1. Demonstrated expertise in one or more of the following areas: data design, curation, and analysis; data visualization, translation, and archiving; digital media production; mobile applications; textual and linguistic analysis; digital pedagogy; digital literacies; digital aesthetics and design; and digital cultural ethnography. 2. Evidence of interdisciplinary collaboration across disciplines and/or programs. 3. Experience providing instructional workshops and/or technology support to faculty, staff, and students. 3. Experience working with diverse communities and student populations. Background Check Yes  Posting Detail Information Type of Recruitment Open Recruitment Posting Open Date 05/01/2015 Screening Begin Date 05/15/2015 Posting Close Date  Open Until Filled (overrides close field) Yes Special Instructions to Applicants  UA EEO Statement WASHINGTON STATE UNIVERSITY IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY/AFFIRMATIVEACTION EDUCATOR AND EMPLOYER. Members of ethnic minorities, women, special disabled veterans, veterans of the Vietnam-era, recently separated veterans, and other protected veterans, persons of disability and/or persons age 40 and over are encouraged to apply. WSU is committed to excellence through diversity and faculty-friendly policy action, including partner accommodation and NSF ADVANCE Institutional Transformation programs (http://www.advance.wsu.edu/). WSU employs only U.S. citizens and lawfully authorized non-U.S. citizens. All new employees must show employment eligibility verification as required by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. WSU is committed to providing access and reasonable accommodation in its services, programs, activities, education and employment for individuals with disabilities. To request disability accommodation in the application process, contact Human Resource Services: 509-335-4521(v), Washington State TDD Relay Service: Voice Callers: 1-800-833-6384; TDD Callers: 1-800-833-6388, 509-335-1259(f), or hrs@wsu.edu. Posting Supplemental Questions Required fields are indicated with an asterisk (*). How did you hear about this employment opportunity? WSU Website Professional Journal/Association Personal Contact/Referral Chronicle of Higher Education Higher Education Recruitment Consortium (HERC) State of Washington WorkSource INSIGHT Into Diversity Inside Higher Ed Indeed.com Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Newspaper Career Fair Other  Applicant Documents Required Documents Curriculum Vitae Cover Letter Reference Contact Info Writing Sample 1 
