On January 31, Henry Ford College in Dearborn, Michigan hosted the 2015 DrupalCamp Michigan. Matrix: The Center for Digital Humanities and Social Sciences, an official sponsor, was well represented at the 2015 DrupalCamp with members of the Matrix staff attending the daylong event along with a featured presentation and discussion by Matrix’s very own System Administrator and Engineer, Zachery Schlemmer. Growing in popularity and usage to operate websites around the globe, Drupal serves as an internal foundation for a variety of websites from small, personal blogs to large corporate, political, and government websites. A free and open-source content management software, its interesting name, Drupal, comes from “druppel”, a Dutch word meaning “drop” in reference to water droplets. DrupalCamps are regional conferences for members of the Drupal community to meet, discuss, and share experiences, knowledge, and tips relevant to Drupal use. With more than 1 million members and 31,000 developers, the Drupal community is internationally recognized as one of the most robust, passionate groups of content management system users. Along with approximately 100 other attendees, Matrix’s Zachery Schlemmer, System Administrator and Engineer; Anthony Donofrio, Lead KORA developer; Austin Truchan, designer; and James Green, programmer, traveled to Dearborn, Michigan to participate in DrupalCamp Michigan. Zachery Schlemmer’s presentation, “The Power of Drupal from a ‘Systems’ Perspective”, was featured as one of the conference’s eleven sessions. In his presentation, Schlemmer offered listeners valuable insight into the systems aspect of website operation. With his past experiences using Drupal to accommodate different needs within a variety of projects, Schlemmer is knowledgeable of the wide range of options available to Drupal users. After presenting, Schlemmer and attendees engaged in a discussion comprised of comments, questions, and feedback. Despite his advanced proficiency in using the Drupal software, Schlemmer is quick to note the additional knowledge and insights shared at DrupalCamp conferences. With a rising number of DrupalCamps scheduled for 2015, Matrix is excited to be an active contributor to ongoing and future discussions of content management system innovation. MATRIX Systems Engineer Zachery Schlemmer presents at 2015 DrupalCamp Michigan Attendees of 2015 DrupalCamp Michigan
