For the past few months I've been obsessing about getting a new rucksack to carry my computer around. My dear, cheaply purchased a decade ago, rucksack is finally giving up the ghost (but to tell the truth it was the best rucksack I could find at the time on a very limited budget, and Husband winds me up that it looks like I'm always going camping when I go to work). I have to have a rucksack to watch out for weight distribution over my back, but also I feel more secure with a backpack on, walking through London. Time to hit the shops!But man, are the laptop bags out there all fugly. Most things for sale make you look like you are about to do the 10 peaks challenge, rather than be sassy academic-about-town!!!! etc etc.  There is a serious gap in the market for smart, professional looking backpacks. I've done a trawl of the internet, and for the past day or so been chatting to various people on the twitters who wanted to know what I dug up, so here, for your "back to school special" is a roundup of the best laptop bags I have found.Ally Capellino does lovely canvas ones. (via @rachelcoldicutt) Sandqvist also do ones in this retro/vintage canvas style (via the power of google), and Notemaker stock a whole range of nice ones, especially the Herschel bags (via @flexnib).Other brands worth having a look at are Knomo (via @jzgarnett) and Koyono (via @_ndrew) and Samsonite (via @simonmpratt) and Booq. (via @finnarne) and Tumi (via @claireconnollys). On the affordable end of the nicely designed spectrum, Belkin (via @ursa_minor_) and Crumpler (via @DavidBeavan). On the outrageously expensive end of the nicely designed spectrum, Steven Harkin (via google). Others swear by Timbuktu (@captain_primate) or Deuter (@sharmanedit). And you can, of course, go into the wondeful world of Etsy to see if there is anything there that takes your fancy (via @antimony27). (Thanks to anyone I missed in my twitter feed, too! I tried to keep a track...)So there you have it. You should find something you really, really like amongst all that, right?I've ordered something - I just need a new bag - but I'm still searching for the perfect match... 
