The second event recorded in the rocks of the Puente Hills began some 23 million years ago.  The trench system, which had for so long dominated the formation of Southern California, ended around 28 Ma, when the Pacific Plate transform convergence replaced the Farallon Plate trench system.  As the “trailing edge of the Farallon Plate entered the subduction zone,” 1 the Pacific Plate was brought into contact with the North American Plate.  The Pacific Plate’s collision, in contrast to the Farallon Plate, which had collided with the North American plate almost perpendicularly, was “nearly parallel” 2 to the North American Plate.  This new transform fault—the “notorious San Andreas Fault of California” 3—would live up to its name; it would transform the greater Los Angeles region and give rise to the greater Puente Hills.  This story is recorded in the thick marine rocks that underlie the Hills and in the volcanic rocks that form the boundary between the old plate subduction system and the new plate transform system. When the Pacific Plate slid in behind the remnants of the Farallon Plate, it made contact with the North American Plate, broke off slivers and blocks of continental crust, and began dragging them away toward the northwest.  Thus, as the Pacific Plate moved almost parallel to the North American plate boundary, it picked up and began to drag Southern California and the greater Los Angeles region to the northwest. 4 The first result of this northwesterly transfer and subsequent dragging of chunks of crust caused the Western Transverse Range 5 to break away from the Peninsular  Range.  At one time the Western Transverse Range had lain parallel to the Peninsular Range with its southern rim, the Channel Islands, lying near San Diego. When the blocks and chunks of crust forming the bedrock of Southern California were transferred from the North American Plate, the Pacific Plate picked up the Transverse Range blocks.  In effect, the Pacific Plate, scraping against the North American Plate, violently wrenched the Western Transverse Range from its position next to the Peninsular  Range along the continent, rotating it clockwise 110 degrees to its present east to west configuration. 6 This block rotation stretched, thereby thinning, the remaining crust, drawing lava and the lower basement rock up to fill the gap. This process of rotating is known through the volcanic rocks—the Glendora and El Modeno volcanic rocks—which spewed out of the cracks that had opened in the bedrock of the newly-opened marine basin. These formations were directly laid over the bedrock formations; their story is one of rifting, rafting, and rotation, which would ultimately result in the opening of the Los Angeles Basin and the formation of the thick marine sediments that constitute the roof rock of the Puente Hills. 7 Excerpted from Richard H. Ross. “From Rock, Wind, and Water: A Natural History of the Puente Hills.” Claremont Graduate University, 2006. Notes:Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, 215. ↩Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, 215. ↩Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, 216. ↩McPhee, Basin and Range, 180. See Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest,  and T. L. Wright, “Structural Geology and Tectonic Evolution of the Los Angeles Basin,” K.T. Biddle, ed. Active Margin Basins.  American Association of Petroleum Geologist Memoir 52. (Tulsa: The  American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 1991), 35–134. ↩“Trending essentially east-west across the regional grain of Southern  California is the Transverse  Range province, which comprises elongate  mountain ranges and valleys, chains of hills, an broad basins that are  geologically very complex. The province as a whole resembles the  adjoining Coast Range and Peninsular  Range regions in several aspects,  but is distinguished from them by prevailing east-west structural  trends.” Jahns, “Investigations and problems of southern California  Geology,” 17).  The Transverse Ranges are separated into eastern and  western segments. The eastern Transverse Ranges are, from east to west:  the Eagle, Pinto, Little San Bernardino, and San Bernardino. The western  Transverse Ranges are, from east to west: the San  Gabriel, Santa  Monica, Santa Susana, Topatopa, Pine, and Santa Ynez Mountains. Only the  western Transverse Range blocks were rotated during the switch from a  subduction to transform margin. The Peninsular Ranges are, from south to  north: Laguna, Vallecito, Santa Rosa, Agua Tibia, San Jacinto, and  Santa Ana  Mountains. In addition, the Peninsular Range extends, through  the Southern California Batholith formation, into the Baja Peninsula of  Mexico and is geologically part of the overall Peninsular Range block  system. (Richard H. Jahns, “Investigations and problems of southern  California Geology,” Section 1 in Chapter I, Geology of Southern California, Richard H. Jahns, ed., California Division of Mines Bulletin 170. (San Francisco: Department of Natural Resources, 1954), 11. ↩The rotational axis was the San   Gabriel to Chino Hills to Cristianitos  faults east of the Puente basin.  This fault system—though each  individual member would remain active between 18 to 0 Ma—was replaced by  a series of other faults. Foremost among those beginning 6 Ma was the  San Andreas Fault system. When the San Andreas became active, the  Pacific Plate continued to drag the Peninsular Range block northward  opening the Gulf of California as Baja  California was detached from its  initial position along mainland Mexico and added to the Pacific Plate.  For more information on the rotation of the Transverse Range blocks. See  Yeats, “Tectonics of the San Gabriel basin and Surroundings, Southern  California,” 1158 – 1182, Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest,  Wright, “Structural Geology and Tectonic Evolution of the Los Angeles  Basin,” and Raymond Ingersoll and Peter E. Rumelhart, “Three-stage  Evolution of the Los Angeles Basin, Southern California,” Geology. 27(7) July 1999. ↩Peter W. Weigand, et. al., “The Conejo Volcanics and other Miocene Volcanic Suites in Southwestern California,” in Contributions to Crustal Evolution of the Southwestern United States,  Andrew Barth ed., Special Paper 365, (Boulder Colorado: The Geological  Society of America, 2002), 197. See Ingersoll and Rumelhart,  “Three-stage Evolution of the Los  Angeles Basin, Southern California,”  595. See also, Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, and  Andrew J. Meigs and Michael E. Oskin, “Convergence, Block Rotation, and  Structural Interference Across the Peninsular-Transverse Range Boundary,  Eastern Santa Monica Mountains, California,” in Contributions to Crustal Evolution of the Southwestern United States, Andrew Barth ed., Special Paper 365, (Boulder Colorado: The Geological Society of America, 2002) 279 – 295. ↩
