The first event recorded in the rock of the Puente Hills began in the Mesozoic Era, some 245 million years ago (Ma). These rocks were formed when an oceanic plate called the Farallon began to slide underneath the North American Plate. Volcanoes erupted on the continental margin, and oceanic sediments were compressed up against and thrust onto the continent, adding chunks of crust to the North American continental margin.  This rock, compressed, wedged, and thrust onto the continent was recorded in the depths of the Puente Hills and Santa Ana Mountains as the Bedford Canyon Formation (160 Ma). While the Bedford Canyon Formation was deposited in the subduction trench and then compressed up against and thrust onto the continental margin, volcanoes were erupting—as recorded in the Santiago Peak Volcanics (135 Ma).  Deep below the volcanoes, a thick, viscous molten rock was drawn up from the upper mantle and cooled in gigantic granite masses, creating the Southern California Batholith (ca. 120–95 Ma), which forms the backbone of Southern California. These formations are the rocks of a trench system, and they “form the basement of the area now occupied by the Whittier fold-fault system.” 1  These basement rocks are in turn overlain by a series of marine and non-marine trench type rocks, known as the Williams, Ladd, Trabuco, Santiago Silverado, Sespe, and Vaqueros Formations (ca. 90 to 16 Ma). The visible parts of these volcanoes, rock layers, and batholiths have long since been eroded away, but their roots are still with us, deep underground, forming the Puente Hills bedrock.  The final formations, the Sespe and Vaqueros, record the final stages in the life of the Farallon plate and its descent into the mantle below the North American Plate. These rocks mark the end of one story of tectonic upheaval and hint at the beginning of a new one.  The rocks of the Puente Hills of this new era have a different story to tell. 2 Excerpted from Richard H. Ross. “From Rock, Wind, and Water: A Natural History of the Puente Hills.” Claremont Graduate University, 2006. Notes:T. Bjorklund and K Burke, “Four Dimensional Analysis of the Inversion of  a half-graben to form the Whittier Fold-Fault System of the Los Angeles  Basin,” Journal of Structural Geology, 24(2002): 1370 – 1. ↩Bjorklund and Burke, “Four Dimensional Analysis of the Inversion of a  half-graben to form the Whittier Fold-Fault System of the Los Angeles  Basin,” 1370 – 1. The Farallon Plate still exists as remnants in the  Juan de Fuca and Cocos Plates along the Pacific Coast, and as fragments  that underlie North America from the Southwest to deep (2700km) beneath  the western Atlantic  Ocean. Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest,  216–218. ↩
