Overhead the sun coursed, time passed slowly but surely and underneath, tectonic plates floated on molten rock, bumping and grinding against each other, trying to fit but always failing. “Where two pieces rubbed edges, the earth twisted, folded, buckled over,” slipped up and down, and sheared sideways violently. That happened here for millions of years, and underneath the Hills reared up, while wind and rain cut them down, washing the dirt into the surrounding ocean. Eventually, this landscape came to look like what we know today, a wedge shaped mass of low, domed, gently rolling uplands, dissected by steep, deeply eroded canyons.  The rocks of the Puente Hills can reveal something about the history of the Puente Hills. 1 Plate Tectonics Overview The absence of rocks indicates that for most of their natural history, the Puente Hills, the greater Los Angeles region and Southern California existed somewhere far off the west coast of the ancestral continent of North America, called Laurentia.  Had one stood on the tallest peak in an ancient mountain chain located in eastern Nevada, one would have looked out over the open ocean. There would have been nothing of the greater Puente Hills, just the ocean, slowly taking on a greater and greater load of sediment sluiced off the continent and into the ocean deep. This coastline—running roughly from the Mojave Desert through eastern Nevada into northern Utah—was a tranquil and stable place. This tranquility and stability remained for much of the long history of the western North American continent.  All things geological come to an end sooner or later however, and around 245 million years ago, during the Mesozoic era, the western margin of the North American continent underwent a series of significant tectonic upheavals as two different ocean plates collided with the ancestral continent of North America. 2 Today, geologists have divided the Earth into about twenty crustal segments called plates.  These plates are thin, rigid pieces of crust that are always in motion, floating on the heat currents of the inner Earth. 3 Like bumper cars they bump and grind against each other, and when they collide, new chunks of crust and mountains are created.  When an oceanic plate collides with a continental plate at a perpendicular angle, the denser oceanic crust will slide under the lighter continental land mass. As an oceanic plate plunges below the continental land mass, creating a trench, some of the oceanic plate melts becoming lighter and rises to the surface—“white-hot and violent” 4—creating volcanoes; or, when the molten rock is cooled below the surface, it forms thick, massive deposits of granite called batholiths.  Often this sequence of events—volcanism on and below the surface—is coupled with another crust forming event.  As an oceanic plate plunges below the continental mass, sheets of oceanic crust are shaved off; they become compressed up against the continental landmass and sometimes can be thrust up, over, and onto the continent itself. This process is called subduction and was a major component in the formation of Southern California.  Evidence of all three of these subduction events—volcanoes, granite batholiths, and the crustal shavings—are found buried deep beneath the Puente Hills. 5 Another type of oceanic and continental plate collision results in creating a large fault as an oceanic plate approaches another plate, where both share the same direction of travel. Geologists call this a transform convergence. These two plates will grind and slip, often violently, against each other. Sometimes at the site of these parallel plate convergences, one of the plates will shear off a chunk of the other plate’s crust and carry this newly acquired landmass with it.  The rocks that underlie the Puente Hills reveal what occurred when two massive oceanic plates collided with the western margin of the ancient North American continent.  The rock record helps separate these very complicated collisions into three distinct events; the Farallon subduction, rotation of the Transverse Range blocks and the opening of the Los Angeles basin, and the uplift of the Puente Hills. 6 Excerpted from Richard H. Ross. “From Rock, Wind, and Water: A Natural History of the Puente Hills.” Claremont Graduate University, 2006. Notes:Kim Stanley Robinson, The Gold Coast, (New York: Tom Doherty Associates Book, Inc., 1988), 43 – 45. ↩Sharp and Glazner, Geology Underfoot in Southern  California, 5. John McPhee, Basin and Range, 3rd ed., (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1981), 23. David G Howell, Tectonics of Suspect Terranes: Mountain  Building and Continental Growth, (New York: Chapman and Hall, 1989), 180. W. Scott Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest: A Journey through Two Billion Years of Plate-Tectonic History, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 154. ↩The heat of the inner Earth is responsible for the plate motion.  The  iron core of the Earth is surrounded by the mantle, about 1,800 miles  thick, upon which the crust rests. The crust and the upper part of the  mantle is called the lithosphere, this lithosphere is what comprises  these twenty or so plates.  Oceanic plates are generally 3 miles thick  and continental plates about 20 miles thick.  Below these plates is the  upper mantle rock, called the asthenosphere.  The rocks of the  asthenosphere are slightly radioactive and produce more heat than they  lose, causing a convection current—where hot material rises and then  moves to the side as it cools. The plates slide on the surface of this  viscous molten rock, moving at different speeds and directions; some  move less than an inch per year while others move as much as four inches  per year, with the average being about two inches per year. Sharp, Geology Underfoot in Southern California, 2 – 3. ↩McPhee, Basin and Range, 23. ↩McPhee, Basin and Range, 23. Sharp, Geology Underfoot in Sourthern California, 2 – 3. Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, 186. Also see Don Mellor, American Rock: Region, Rock, and Culture in American Climbing, (Woodstock, Vermont: The Countryman Press, 2001), 48 – 63. ↩McPhee, Basin and Range, 180. Baldridge, Geology of the American Southwest, 186. ↩
