Overhead the sun courses, time passes, and on those rare clear days in Southern California when the wind and rain have washed the sky clean, what appears on the southwestern horizon from the upper reaches of Claremont, California, is a line of low slung hills that characterizes the geographical basin and range topography of the greater Los Angeles region. The basins are, from west to east, the Santa Barbara Channel, the Ventura Basin, the San Fernando Valley, the Los Angeles Central Basin (including the coastal plains), the San   Gabriel Basin, the San Bernardino/Chino Basin, collectively called the Upper Santa Ana  River Basin. The Los Angeles, San Gabriel, and Chino Basins are transitional between the east-west tending Transverse and the west northwest tending Peninsular Ranges that form the northern and southern geographical borders of the greater Los Angeles region. 1 The eastern Los Angeles Basin features two ranges of low hills (100-500m) that “loosely connect” the western Transverse Range and the northern Peninsular Range: the San Jose and Puente Hills. 2 The Puente Hills, which extend west northwest from the Santa Ana Mountains, may be sub-divided into three segments: the western Puente Hills (also known as the Whittier Hills), the Puente Hills, and the Chino Hills (see Figure 2). These three segments form one continuous geographical unit and are referred to as the greater Puente Hills, and they have, like all of Southern California and the greater Los Angeles area, a rich natural history. 3 This natural history, however, usually only comes to us in the form of a simple line map on the inside of a book, corresponding not to the natural history itself and its geologic, climatological, and ecological boundaries but to human defined political boundaries.  This results in the natural history of a place, like the Puente Hills, being understood as a given, for “history begins when people come on the scene.” Often, our short view of time causes us to lose sight of the role that Earth’s geology, climate, and ecology have on our history; they are not simply a given nor a backdrop but are an active part of the history of a place.  The natural forces of geology, climate, and ecology are a part of the history of the Puente Hills. 4 This natural history of the Puente Hills is a dynamic one, always in motion, always undergoing transformation. The Hills were formed from rock thrown up in tectonic collisions, which were continually worn down through the corrosive action of wind and water. Then the vestiges became rounded and deeply eroded hills, mantled with rock outcrops, soil, sagebrush, chaparral, oak, conifers, and grass, occasionally beset by and regenerated from fire.  They were trod upon by the mastodon, mammoth, bison, dire wolf, saber-tooth cat, Teratornis, and blow-fly. This natural assemblage reflects the rich natural history of the Puente Hills. A story of rock and water and what comes from rock and water—erosion, soil, flora, fire, and fauna; each molding the other, this is the natural history of the Puente Hills. Excerpted from Richard H. Ross. “From Rock, Wind, and Water: A Natural History of the Puente Hills.” Claremont Graduate University, 2006. Notes:Robert S. Yeats, “Tectonics of the San Gabriel basin and Surroundings, Southern California,” GSA Bulletin, 116(9/10), September/October 2004: 1158. The Transverse Range is  divided into two sections, the eastern section includes the San  Bernardino Mountains, and the western section, which includes the San  Gabriel and Santa Monica Mountains. The Peninsular Range is the west  northwest tending mountain range that extends from northern Baja Mexico  through the San Diego region and terminates against the western  Transverse Range in the eastern Los  Angeles Basin, as the Santa Ana  Mountains Yeats “Tectonics of the San Gabriel basin and Surroundings,  Southern California,” 1158. ↩Daniel S. Cooper, “Breeding Landbirds of a Highly Threatened Open Space: The Puente-Chino Hills, California,” Western Birds, 31(2000): 213 – 214. ↩When viewed from above, the Puente Hills (see Figure 1 and Figure 2)  form a wedge shape as they emerge out of the Santa Ana Mountains to the  southeast and run to a point just east of downtown Los   Angeles to the  northwest.  The Hills are bound on the southeast by the Santa Ana River,  which separates the Puente Hills from the Santa Ana Mountains. The  Hills are bound to the northwest by the San Gabriel and Rio Hondo Rivers  at the Whittier Narrows.  To the north, the Hills are bound by San Jose  Creek separating the Puente Hills from the San Jose Hills (which are  geologically a part of the Puente Hills, sharing a majority of their  natural history with the Puente Hills, but lie outside the scope and  space of this essay) and the San Gabriel  Basin. The greater Puente  Hills stretch for 434 square miles, totaling about 277,760 acres. To the  south and the east, the Hills are bound by faults, large and small—the  Whittier Fault is located to the south, and the Chino Fault is on the  eastern side with numerous smaller faults located throughout the hills.  One fault that is of importance to the greater Los Angeles region is the  recently discovered Puente Hills Blind Thrust Fault.  While this fault  is named after the Puente Hills, it is located outside the Hills proper  underlying the Coyote Hills to the south.  This fault does not appear to  be directly related to the specific geologic events that formed the  Puente Hills (see endnote 23 for more information).  The Puente Hills,  based on their geographical and geologic position and formation, form a  formidable “‘peninsula’ of open space through the urbanized eastern Los    Angeles Basin.” (Cooper, “Breeding Landbirds of a Highly Threatened  Open Space,” 214)  Currently, only a small percentage of the greater  Puente Hills is preserved as open space, concentrated in the east in the  roughly 12,000 acre Chino Hills State Park and in the west in the  roughly 3,800 acre Puente Hills Landfill Native Habitat Preservation  Authority ( the organization that commissioned this essay).  These areas  are preserving the last vestiges of the pre-Human—or at least pre-1700  Spanish-Anglo—natural history. The natural history that formed and took  place within the Puente Hills unfolded across the entire breadth of the  Puente Hills regardless of human constructed boundaries.  See Yeats,  “Tectonics of the San Gabriel Basin and Surroundings, Southern  California,” Robert P. Sharp and Allen F. Glazner, Geology Underfoot in Southern California,  (Missoula, Montana: Mountain Press Publishing Company, 1993), T.  Bjorklund and K Burke, “Four Dimensional Analysis of the Inversion of a  half-graben to form the Whittier Fold-Fault System of the Los Angeles  Basin,” Journal of Structural Geology, 24(2002): 1370 – 1, Cooper, “Breeding Landbirds of a Highly Threatened Open Space: The Puente-Chino Hills, California,” Western Birds,  31(2000): 214, and the Puente Hills Landfill Native Habitat  Preservation Authority: http://www.habitatauthority.org/ whoweare.shtml,  for information on square miles, acres, elevation, and geographical  location. See also, United States Department of the Interior  Geographical Survey, 7.5 minute topographic series revised quadrangles:  “San Dimas,” “Baldwin Park,” “El Monte,” “Prado Dam,” “La Habra,” “Yorba   Linda,” “Ontario,” and “Whittier,” (Washington, D.C.: Government  Printing Office, 1981). ↩Ted Steinberg, Down to Earth: Nature’s Role in American History,  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 4.  The Puente Hills Landfill  Native Habitat Preservation Authority commissioned this paper as part  of a series of histories about the land they administer; however, the  discussion of the natural history of a place cannot be done without  contextualizing the natural history throughout the formation of the  Puente Hills as a totality.  See also, William Cronon, ed., Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature,  (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1996) for a good introduction to  current environmental historical scholarship on the human construction  of nature as a place with clearly defined borders. ↩
