I am participating in a panel discussion on “The Public and Private in Media” as a part of an art exhibition: The New Normal. The New Normal examines the issue of private information becoming less private in our technological society. Regardless of how well I present/discuss today, this exhibition has made me reexamine my ideas of the private as increasingly public beyond that of  identity theft and and the Patriot Act to include that of the culture of privacy surrounding humanities research. This is a topic that I have struggled with: expressing my thoughts in an open forum via a blog and the “publishing” of my research library via Zotero (see this post by Mark Sample for a thoughtful reflection on publishing your Zotero library). I choose to publish a blog and my research—to make the private public–for two reasons. First, an online identity is fast becoming a prerequiste in the academic world, and while it may be one that is not necessarily our choice or under our control we can make it our choice and control it by doing. Second, as Cameron Blevins and Mark Sample have effectively argued,  making one’s thoughts and research public offers scholars a new, important, and powerful way to collaborate and contribute to humanist scholarship at a greater level that ultimately makes one’s own work as well as that of other scholars better. The kicker, however, is that while I control—choose—the dissemination initially, what happens to the private made public may quickly leave my hands. The question is, then, is this necessarily a “bad” thing (maybe despite using a Creative Commons license)? The essays by Michael Connor (curator of The New Normal), Marisa Olson, and Clay Shirky, I think, point out that the private made public is not necessarily bad or good only that the individual must become evermore aware and proactive in managing the  private/public (Skirky’s idea of the “opt-in, opt-out, don’t ask”?).  This is not to suggest that there are not “bad” aspects; one need only have followed the controversy over Facebook’s Term of Service (also see this short Flash presentation), let alone the issues surrounding the Patriot Act. Nonetheless, I think the issue of the private made public as contained and examined in The New Normal is examined as a complicated issue that is as much grey as it is black and white, and that, ultimately, the issue becomes one of choice, of control and when we have control over the private made public and when we do not. I must admit that I feel that I will be out of my league during the panel discussion, that I have not had enough time to internalize the material and the idea of the way in which the private is becoming increasingly more public. I do, however, know that my participation, the airing of my private thoughts in a public space even if incomplete about the private and the public is good: good for furthering collaboration; what I can learn from the other panelists and the audience; for furthering my own work in the digital humanities; and understanding the issue of the private and the public as it relates to one of my digital projects, the Oral History Catalogue. 
