This year’s THATCamp was a blast, and it was great to be back at CHNM for the weekend. Having finally caught up on rest, I began filling out the feedback form for this year’s event and my responses morphed into a handful of bloggable ideas about how to shake-up the unconference. I’m not even sure THATCamp needs to be shaken up, because over the last five years it has matured into a consistently awesome event in itself. So, consider these ideas icing on the cake and some things that I hope to incorporate into the next event that I organize.  Setting The Vibe  I’m a big fan of kicking off workshops, meet-ups, or conferences by going around the room and allowing each person to introduce themselves to the entire group. We’re there to participate, and while not everyone will propose a session these basic intros ultimately lead to engaging conversations, sessions, and future collaborations. It doesn’t take much time for each person to say: “I’m (blank) from (blank). I do (blank). I’d like to discuss (blank).” If there’s a time crunch, having each person say their name and three words to describe themselves as an alternative can result in some fun or odd responses. These individual introductions break down any remaining hesitancy to speak to the group, and help connect faces with twitter handles. I also think that in events like this year’s THATCamp V where over half the participants were new to the event, this may be welcoming. Ditch the auditorium, and embrace chaos. I understand space constraints when organizing an event at a university, but the use of the auditorium for initial scheduling and sessions immediately results in the unconference vibe shifting from one that is participatory to one that is more controlled and less spontaneous. My urge is to resist that. Ideally, we would be facing one another with the ability to see the faces of our peers. 150 people is too large for a single circle, but I’ve seen large events like the LOD-LAM summit effectively divide the participants into two sides of chairs facing one another. Sessions / Alt Sessions  Shorter session periods, smaller discussions, and smaller rooms. One of the interesting shifts in THATCamp sessions from year one to now is that individual session participation seems to have doubled, and they increasingly address general topics. One of the best “sessions” that I had at this year’s THATCamp was just Matt, Boone and I discussing Twitter bots in the hallway, and later hacking away code around a table. Adopting shorter 45 min session periods would hopefully result in sessions that have greater focus with fewer participants, encourage spontaneous sessions, and engage participants with a variety of skills and backgrounds. I also think smaller sessions create more chances to make friends with your peers. Encourage alt sessions. This is difficult to plan for and needs to be organic, but I’d like to think of THATCamp as an event where you’ll see things that you won’t at a normal conference. A few years ago David Staley created an art installation in the Research 1 tower, and I’d love to see similar exhibits or creative expressions. True, we now have @alienweedman and @horse_thatbooks to keep us entertained, but within our network of digital humanists we also have folks building interactive museum exhibits, large data visualizations, wearable Arduinos, and experimenting with weird hacks. Why are they not visible at THATCamp? Maybe next year we can organize the THATCamp “Hall of Hack” where showing off these projects is encouraged. Scheduling  Start Friday night, and skip Sunday morning. There has always been a large drop-off of participation on Sunday for various reasons (travel, church, fatigue) and it seems like every year someone suggests getting rid of Sunday sessions completely. I’m pretty sure Dan Chudnov previously suggested moving scheduling to the night before THATCamp, and I’d like to second that idea. Instead of making the unconference one day, why don’t we do the majority of scheduling the night before on Friday? We could start off very informal over drinks and create a rough schedule, and give participants some breathing room to propose additional sessions in the time between Friday night and Saturday morning. Counter-session proposals. I’m a little concerned that THATCamp sessions may sometimes be too broad (for example: scholarly publishing) to amount to much, and that may dissuade campers who have already been to a handful of THATCamps. Rehashing previous discussions should not be the point of THATCamp. I see counter-proposals as an experimental way to nurture new and radical topics by taking a basic session topic and proposing an additional or substitute session that makes an argument, or turns it on its head. For example, a counter session proposal on open access could be “boycotting Elsevier”, or something similarly provocative. My hope isn’t necessarily that THATCampers stir trouble, but that sessions have more of a point to them, which I think will ultimately lead to more interesting outcomes from the unconference. This idea is still rough, so please pitch in your own ideas. What ideas do you have? 
