I’m going on a bike tourÂ in Quebec with my kids. That and other prioritiesÂ mean I need to shift my focus away from Lila for a bit. But here’s what coming up when I get back. Convert unread content into notes. Lila will take unread articles and books and convert them into slips for embedded reading. Â I may have been over-thinking the technology that is required here. After all, most unread content is already organized into slip-sized shapes, short units of thought, i.e., paragraphs. Compute association between notes. I have done a rough cut at calculating association between slips, based on keyword queries. Keyword queries are not enough, as a cognitive technology should operate more on the level of questions, i.e., something that digs into meaning.Â I have been thinking about other methods of computing association, based on word properties. Most recently I have been thinking about topic analysis and statistical clustering. I need to dive into this latter approach. I must pick the best approach. Demonstrate the use of concreteness to order notes. I believe the use of word concretenessÂ could become the most interesting feature of Lila. I did some tests back in December before I started blogging. Fascinating stuff. I will post some demonstrations. Draft the user interface. Â I have been cutting a few drafts of Lila’s user interface, but I am stuck a bit as I wrestle with item 2. Post an updated and unified version of the solution architecture. I have been blogging my way through a solution architecture since January, but this process has been as much discovery for me as articulation for interested readers. Blogs are helpful that way. I have been reconsidering several things along the ways, trimming here, extending there. Once I complete items 1-4, I will likely blow away everything I have written so far and post a updated and unified version of the solution architecture. When this is complete, I expect I will choose one piece of Lila to code, likely item 2. I am also considering a deep dive into Digital Humanities research. Stick around.
