Categories? Very eighteenth century. Tags? So Web 2.0. Pretty cryptic stuff. What will Lila do differently? Let’s take another step. Tags are messier than categories; I called tags evil. But tags are easier to manage than the next level down, the words themselves. Tags are messy when left to humans, but tags can be managed with automation. Many services auto-suggest tags, controlling the vocabulary. Lila will generate its own tags, refreshing them on demand. Tags can be managed. Words are the true pit of chaos.Â People conform to the rules of language when they write, or they don’t. People make up words on the fly. Down the rabbit hole. But is it so bad?Â It happens time and again that we think an information problem is too complex to be automated, only to analyze it and discover that we can do a good chunk of what we hoped following a relatively simple set of rules. One mature technology is keyword search. Keyword search is so effective we take it for granted. Words can be managed with the right technologies. Another mature technology isÂ Natural Language Processing (NLP). Its history dates back to the 1950’s. The field is enjoying a resurgence of interest in the context of cognitive computing. Consider that a person can learn basic capability in a second language with only a couple thousand words and some syntax for combining them. Words and syntax. Data and rules. Build dictionaries with words and their variant forms. Assign parts-of-speech. Use pattern recognition to pick out words occurring together. Run through many examples to develop context sensitivity.Â Shakespeare it is not, but human meaning can be extracted from unstructured text in this way for many useful purposes. Lila’s purpose is to make connections between passages of text (“slips”) and to suggest hierarchical views, e.g., a table of contents. I’ve talked a lot about how Lila can compute connections. Keywords and NLP can be used effectively to find common subjects across passages. Hierarchy is something different. How can the words in a passage say something about how it should be ordered relative to other external passages?Â We can go no deeper than the words. It’s all we have to work with. To compute hierarchy, Lila needs something different, something special. Stay tuned.
