I’m a classification nut, as I told you. In the last post I told you about the way I organize files and emails into folders. Scintillating stuff, I know. But let’s go a level deeper toward Lila by talking about tagging. Tags are the evil sisters of categories. Categories are top-down classification — someone on high has a idealized model of how everything fits into nice neat buckets. Tags are situational and bottom-up. In the heat of the moment, you decide that this file or that email is about some subject. Tags don’t conform to a model, you make them up on the fly. You add many tags, as many as you like. Mayhem! I’ve tried ’em, I don’t like ’em. Tags do one thing very well, they let you create surprising views on your content. Categories suffer from the fact that they only provide one view, a hierarchical structured tree. Tags let you see the same content in many different ways. Oh! Look. There’s that short story I wrote tagged with “epic.” And there’s those awesome vacation pics tagged with the same. Hey, I could put those photos on that story and make it so much better. But the juice you get out of tags sours fast. The fact that they are situational and bottom-up causes their meaning to change. “Bad” and “sick” used to mean negative things. As soon as people get about a hundred tags they start refactoring them, merging and splitting them, using punctuation like underscores to give certain tags special meanings. Pretty soon they dump the whole lot of them and start over. Tags fail. What people really want is, yup, categories. Lila is a new way to get the juice out of tags without going sour. Lila works collaboratively with the author to organize writing. Lila will let writers assign categories and tags, but treat them as mere suggestions. The humanÂ is smart, Lila knows, and needs his or her help, so it will use the author’s suggestions to come up with its own set of categories and tags. Lila’s technique will be based on natural language processing. Best part, the tags can also be regenerated at the click of a button, so that the tags never sour. You get the surprising views and the tags maintain their freshness. Sweet. I’ve been pretty down on tags in this post, so I will say there is one more thing that tags do quite well. They connect people, like hash tags in twitter. They form lose groupings of content so that disparate folks can find each other. It doesn’t apply so much to a solitary writing process, but it might fit to a social writing process. I will think on that.
