In the Cathy Davidson “History and Future of (Mostly) Higher Education” MOOC, I’m really intrigued by her decision (or maybe Coursera’s decision?) to have so much of the content delivered by means of video.  Particularly I’m intrigued (or even concerned) by the use of video that takes so little advantage of the affordances of the video medium.   In every one of the videos (all of which are much longer than I would recommend for any online video) I’ve found myself wondering “why does this need to be a video? Why not just text?”   There are so many great examples of educational video which uses what video can do.  From the RSA Animate work, to the California Academy of Sciences series on biodiversity (for example).  Or of course Khan Academy in general and Smarthistory in particular. We know so many great ways to make educational video, and we already have text (even with illustrations).  Why make videos that just translate text (or even lectures) into video?   I’ve written about this before.  And I’m far from the only one.  So I’m wondering what was the thinking behind doing things in the Coursera course the way that (at least so far) they’re being done. In my own course (see particularly the mini-lectures)–not a MOOC, since it was far from massive, but generally open and certainly online, that I taught twice, 3 and 4 years ago, I thought about this a lot and chose to have text with hyperlinks and illustration (and broken down into much smaller pieces, and more readable), rather than me talking to the camera.  And we (as a class) discussed that choice and discussed what video can and can’t do (as well as voicethread, discussion forums, audiobooks, traditional textbooks, etc).  (And of course, the class used plenty of video, when that was appropriate.  Just not video of me talking to the camera). I really wonder what are the advantages (or at least differences) in having mini-lectures that are like mine (in the “Introductions and Foundations” section or “What is Learning and What is Literature” or any of the others), vs. having me say that same information (maybe with pictures on the side or subtitles) to the camera from a couch with a cup of coffee in my hand.
