 [Slide 1] So, I want to use my introduction to distinguish between two movements that I’m finding common in my field, and which are, in my view, transforming how we view narrative. [Slide 2] I work in literary studies, but I’m interested in the ways digital technology transforms nineteenth-century history. My first book was on the British poet /printer William Blake and how his works are transformed by artists, students, and editors in twenty-first century media. My current book looks at steampunk as another possible intersection between nineteenth-century culture, media studies and the digital humanities. For me, narrative is tightly connected to storytelling: but I define this broadly. There are novels as stories, yes, but stories are also connected to how we understand gender, race, sexuality, disability. One of the more fascinating things about narrative is the way the technology or medium of communication changes storytelling. [Slide 3] As anyone who has read Marshall McLuhan or Walter Ong knows, oral stories are fundamentally different from written stories. Written stories allow us to generalize with abstractions, while oral stories are embedded in locality. Writing allows us to participate in mathematics and science, while oral cultures are heavily shaped by the performance of oral poems – the rhyme and meter of which allow them to remember cultural history. These are all generalizations, of course, but what’s really fascinating is that the emergence of digital culture is starting to change things once again. Literary studies is a product of print culture. So, the thing that scares and exhilarates me is figuring out what literary studies can do when connected to digital technology. [Slide 4] I’m going to detour for a moment with a small point Jessica Pressman makes in the introduction to her book Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media. She says that media studies scholars might claim “that one of the reasons close reading remained a staple of American English departments and literary pedagogy is that it required little technological support.” And, in fact, we find this to be the case. English departments, particularly ones that are interested in recovering some essential understanding of “the literary” are making what I consider to be increasingly conservative arguments regarding their objects of study. Scholars argue endlessly over long-nineteenth centuries, periodicity, and other idealistic categories while people in fields like the new formalism try to resurrect an understanding of form that — to me — is meaningless without considering medium and technology. In some ways, sure, the lack of a focus on technology makes English departments cheap. But I’d argue that the claim — made by many scholars in my discipline that “being cheap” is an advantage really reveals an anxiety of literary studies’s impending extinction. The media theorist Jussi Parikka points out that, in an era of climate change, humanists need to consider phenomena as something more than just cultural constructions. We can’t, in other words, address the challenges of our time by — in his words — “closing our eyes and thinking of semiotics.” [Slide 5] I agree with Parikka’s claim, and I want to argue that we should start embracing an analysis of what Lori Emerson has called, following Fredrich Kittler, “media effects.” While Kittler has been rightly criticized for neglecting politics, I think an emerging group of scholars in the field of media archaeology are embracing the political and social implications of Kittler’s media effects. One example of a media effect can be found in Kittler’s analysis of the schizophrenic Daniel Paul Schrieber from Grammophone, Film, Typewriter. Schrieber’s paranoid schizophrenia made him believe that a person visible only to him was recording all of his thoughts. We find these figures throughout the nineteenth century, Kittler in fact reads Seward, the psychologist who goes insane and eats flies from Bram Stoker’s Dracula, in much the same way. Traditionally, psychoanalysis would become a way to narrativize both Schreiber’s and Seward’s schizophrenic condition. But one of Kittler’s innovations was to show how psychoanalysis itself — in its model of having the analyst who teases out the unconscious thoughts of the patient — is really a media effect of the phonograph, which records everything: intentional speech, yes, but also coughing, laughter and sounds that were never intended to be recorded. Madness is understood, mediated, and experienced through the technological frame of the phonograph. Geoffrey-Winthrop Young puts it this way. “Kittler takes literally what Freud introduced as mere metaphors and comparisons. Psychoanalysis is not like phonography or telephony, it is phonography, because it accepts and enacts the new ways humans are determined by the technical standards [of the phonograph and the telephone]” (68). [Slide 6] So, if we look back to English and to narrative, I feel that given the progressive political traditions of our discipline, we need to start considering seriously the impact of different media on the narratives we read and participate in as part of our work. In fact, this is a call not unsimilar to the one Jessica Pressman makes with N. Katherine Hayles in the introduction to the book Comparative Textual Media — that any analysis of literature in the twenty-first century has to contend with the comparative media environment which saturates our world. It isn’t enough, in other words, to read social media in the same way we’ve been taught to read — for instance — Charlotte Bronte’s Jane Eyre or even to read Jane Eyre as a collection of words and signifiers separate from their material modes of publication, distribution, and adaptation. It is important to consider the political unconscious of both forms of narrative. But even this notion of the “unconscious” used by Frederic Jameson and adapted from Jacques Lacan, is itself dependent upon the media conditions that enabled twentieth-century critical theory: namely, the theory book, the conference keynote, even the films representing and disseminating the academic celebrity of figures like Jameson, Lacan, and Derrida. The political debates on Twitter, with their slut-shaming, their racism, their heterosexism, the horrific responses surrounding Ferguson and the misogynist trolls harassing Anita Sarkeesian prove that different media conditions multiply and intensify cultural forms of racism and sexism beyond any single notion of an “unconscious.” And new methodologies in the digital humanities like distant reading and critical code studies illustrate how cultural analysis can be performed at different scales, with different technologies culminating in the emergence of new patterns. Utlimately, I feel that the most exciting developments in literary studies are divorcing themselves from a single-media myopia, understanding the entanglement of nature, technology, and culture, and embracing the complex media ecology surrounding us. Thanks.
