I stumbled upon a project called ‘A Literary Atlas of Europe’ (http://www.literaturatlas.eu/?lang=en), developed by the Institute of Cartography at ETH Zurich. A work-in-progress since 2006, this tremendously ambitious project brings together scholars from the fields of Literary Studies and Cartography, working across countries (mostly Switzerland, Germany and the Czech Republic,) to collaborate on a massive project whose aim is to offer a functional model for mapping fictional space.The website’s purpose is to provide a comprehensive platform in which the geomapping of spaces where the real and the fictional overlay is rendered possible. Moreover, it is supported by ample scholarly work whose common ambition is to posit a consistent methodology of how to map fictional space based on data models, calculation of statistical surfaces and other complex GIS analyses.The layers of this project (still a work-in-progress!) are manifold and merit a much more detailed commentary, so I’ll just mention two aspects that particularly caught my attention. By quickly perusing through the website, I came across the model of an online submission form intended for literary scholars to fill in with information regarding texts and the fictional worlds they describe. When the site is up and running at full speed, this model is intended to automatically update the database of the website, whilst modifying the data and managing redundancies in the entries. It is supposed to be automated, fast and efficient to maximize collaborative work amongst scholars.After further navigation, I came across a blog entry in which the whimsical notion of mapping an entirely fictional space is thoroughly undertaken from a scholarly point of view. A colour-coding scheme is proposed to label a space as invented, transformed or imported from history; fuzzy shapes are posited in place of well-defined geometrical shapes in order to deal with the fragmentary, borderless nature of fictional worlds; whereas cartograms are contemplated as alternatives in order to map the density of settings (i.e. the amount of times a specific setting has appeared in fiction.)In spite of it being an ongoing project, what is exciting about this website is, amongst other things, its methodological awareness of the challenges it must face and the comprehensive way in which it chooses to do so. In fact, several scholarly articles on subjects such as counterfactual spaces, the projection of fiction, modelling uncertain geodata, amongst others, are available to be freely downloaded. Thus, the creators understand not only the interdisciplinary requirements of such scholarship, but also that it must be collaborative and open in order to truly yield its full potential. Whatever the outcome of this ambitious project may be, one can certainly learn from its methodology and its intellectual aims.
