The project Reconstructing California Conservation History is a digital mapping project belonging to Stanford University Spatial History Project. The aim of this project, in their own words, is to “reconstruct a history of conservation of select areas of California by analysing historic land cover maps and comparing them with contemporary land cover examine when (time) and where (space) protection areas were established and assess how successful these protection areas were in conserving the natural resources they were created for.” In order to achieve this goal there is a big challenge: how to collect and integrate scattered data across multiple sources including a large groups of organisations and federal, state and local governments. By exploring two of their main visualisations which are definitely well designed and performed – “A History of Bay Area Open Space Conservation” and “A History of Conservation Land Acquisition in California”, this GIS-based landscape proves to be a powerful tool in data management and analysis, and has a potential to help better understanding how past conservation practice is implemented and offer new approaches to improve conservation efforts in the future.Both of aforementioned interactive systems are time-based visual geographical maps with multilayers which could be checked and analysed in different ways. “Bay Area Open Space Conservation” presents an animate timeline of the growth of conservation network and basic information of each property from 1850 to the present in a series of five slides. Users are able to understand brief histories of how famous properties like Golden Gate came to be protected by clicking highlighted dates in the graph, and various roles of different organisations and governments played in conservation efforts in an interactive timeline with five separated categories. The last slide which invites users to fill in the missing data through links emphasises its strength as a conversational, dynamic and negotiable mapping which is able to integrate disparate sources in effective ways. The major weakness of this map is not able to find specific property and its relevant information by searching engine, which means that users can only find a property by moving around their mouse manually. This leads the map as a tool good at exploring main trend of conservation while not well equipped in finding details. “Conservation Land Acquisition in California” map explores spatial and temporal relationship between open spaces and species, which is created in accordance with the research called “Conservation for the Land or for the Species”. This visualisation enables users to explore the timeline of detection of threatened and endangered plants, birds, and mammals in relation to the timeline of conservation land acquisition in California from 1880. Each layer of three categories (plants, birds and mammals) could be individually checked and investigated by ticking the respective box at the bottom left. The pitfalls of this map are 1) specific statistics of three main categories and the acres of open land are not provided along with the graphs; 2) colours of dots are not well chosen: blue dot of birds and green dot of plants look pretty the same on the map; red dot of mammals added to the green layers of open space look like dark blue which is similar to dotsÂ represented as Â city and plants.Apart from shortcomings mentioned above, both of maps are not scalable, which is problematic for examining the details. Another confusion is on how they present the success or fail of conservation efforts on the designed maps. Maps show the expanded areas of conservation lands butÂ seem not provide evaluations of each property.Â Nonetheless, these two maps illustrate the advantage of digital mapping as a useful tool to explore the changing relationship of time and space in conservation history by integrating data from difference sources and further benefitting analysis and practice in the future.
