‘Walking Ulysses’ in an example of a multimedia display of a written text, in this case a fictional one.The website is presented in an invitingly uncluttered layout, with a square map interface in the centre and a choice of chapters on the right-hand side. The parts of the book which have been paid most attention to in the project are highlighted as recommended starting point for this virtual tour.What is mapped? —Â  Leopold Bloom’s and Stephen Daedalus’ walking routes as portrayed in James Joyce’s seven-hundred-page novel, spanning twenty–four hours in 1904 Dublin. How does it work? — The user selects a chapter form the menu, whereupon the walking route of the corresponding character is displayed on the interactive map. This is based on Google Maps, with an historical map laid on top. You can toggle the view to remove the historic map if required. The navigation is exactly the same as it is on Google Maps. You can even access Street View directly from the integrated map. What else is there to explore? — The developers have added some nifty features to this fairly straightforward map visualization: If you click on one of the markers on the map, e.g. a certain house or location marked with a little walking man, this brings up historical information about this building, if it is still there and what it was and i used for now and then, as for example the facade of Trinity College. A click on the little walking man reveals a text window with a direct textual quote of this character’s utterance about his current location or the immediate textual context of character and place in the novel. Also integrated are historical photographs of a number of locations mentioned in Ulysses. Critique:Basing the whole mapping project on Google Maps is questionable. Although the developers have made the effort to lay the historical map of Dublin on top of the basic map interface, however from a large scale onwards the historic map disappears and we are left with all the current bistros and bus stops visualized by Google. Zooming cannot be avoided to trace smaller walking ratios such as the circling of Sandy Cove in the first chapter.I am also critical of the use of Google Earth in this context. The appeal of this feature as a gimmick is undisputed, however the positions I zoomed into showed modern housing and glass bank buildings, which has nothing to do with Joyce’s Dublin. Conclusion:‘Walking Ulysses’ is a carefully designed, intuitive, multi-faceted display of James Joyce’s complex text. The incorporation of historic photographs, unfalsified direct quotes and background information on iconic locations in the novel is a breath of fresh air compared to hyper-medial cross-linking to Flickr, plot generalization and extremely selective textual references often found in digital literary projects. It serves as a successful model of multi-layered presenation of written text with additions from areas such as georaphy, photography and history without making the end result more confusing than necessary. If anything, this project facilitates access to this notoriously difficult text while much attention has been paid to avoiding too much distortion of the original text.To enhance the authenticity of the project, it is crucial to either disable certain elements of Google Maps, such as showing bus stops and barber shops or to build the project on a more neutral map outside of Google. The Lake District mapping project serves as an example for this, although in that project, multiple tweaks and visualization strategies had to be painstakingly applied manually, whereas Google Maps is ready to use for anyone with a computer.Also, while exact page numbers are indicated after direct quotes, the specific text is not referenced. Instead, the links under ‘resourced’ offer various online versions such as Project Gutenberg and Ulysses Online form online-literature.com. It is not clear whether the whole project is based on an online version of the text, which in turn would prove problematic with respect to textual authenticity, especially in such a much-revised, edited and reverse-edited work as Ulysses.As a fan of modernist literature, the accessibility and apparent smartphone compatibility will certainly accompany me on my next pilgrimage to Dublin!http://ulysses.bc.edu/
