The project I chose for this week’s presentation is the Perdita Manuscripts, an online database for early modern women’s manuscript writings. This digital resource is produced in association with the pure scholarly project which aims to find out “lost women” (“Perdita”) in the early modern period andÂ meanwhileÂ identify and describe their manners of writings from diaries, recipes to the works of poetry and drama. The Perdita Project, the purely scholarly one is intended to be a research tool, offering scholars from history, literature, cultural studiesÂ and women studies a complete online catalogue of early modern female writings. Unlike the ambitious goal achieved by the Perdita Project, the Perdita Manuscripts tries to provide primary sources of manuscripts to undergraduates, postgraduates, and researchers who are unable to go to those archives and libraries. It could be said that this project successfully solves the problemÂ  that people cannot easily access to little known and scattered manuscripts in the separated collections in United Kingdom and the USA. This digital database, therefore, is highly recommended and frequently used in academia especially from the past few decades when historical and literary scholars started to realise the importance of manuscript studies on better understanding the Renaissance and the 17th/18th century cultures.Its strengths and limitations both come from the nature of the Perdita Manuscript, which is a scholar-led and profit-making company, Adam Matthew, operated project. Since it is designed and maintained byÂ a business company, the interface and user experience are super friendly: beginners are able to learn what the website is about and browse the contents with simple click on the homepage, while professional researchers can use search engines to restrict andÂ locate the searching results more quickly. In addition, the Perdita Manuscripts inherits detailed catalogue descriptions from the Perdita Project, and thus its metadata of each manuscript is fully recorded. Users are able to check information such as reference, genre, contents, physical descriptions, repository, bibliography and biography of the compiler in relevant Document Details page. PDF format of manuscripts could be downloaded by page or by section, which definitely save a lot of money for users of non-commercial usage. Nonetheless, limitations are also obvious due to its business characteristics. Manuscripts in Perdita Manuscripts are selective and only around 230 digital copies of over 400 items are offered on website: those without enough length and details are not displayed. Though “Introduction” of the project claimed the website would be updated, if we cautiously checked cross references with scholars articles of any manuscript, we will recognise that the bibliographical data have not yet included any information after 2008.
