<UPDATE> Submissions are now closed. We will be announcing the selected resident in mid-September. Thanks to all who applied!</UPDATE>  NYPL Labs is pleased to announce the Library's first-ever Net Artist Residency, in partnership with local hardware startup Electric Objects.    Based in the East Village, Electric Objects (EO) has an intriguing idea: what if there was a computer dedicated to the sole purpose of exhibiting digital artwork? To find out, they're making one. The E01 will be digital environment -- a screen -- that is free from the distractions and constant pings and alerts of our daily devices. A slowed-down part of the internet that you can display in your home, office, or what have you, as you would a painting or photograph.    EO is in the early stages of designing and prototyping, and they're just wrapping up a Kickstarter campaign to raise funds to manufacture their first generation of screens. To begin exploring the possibilities of the platform, they've started an artist residency program. NYPL Labs is excited to be among their first partners.  As the first of what we hope to be many such opportunities, we're asking applicants to see what beautiful things can be made from our map and NYC history collections. This includes:  More than 20,000 historical maps available in high resolution 	19th century city data (old NYC building footprints, addresses, residential & business info) from our Building Inspector project 	an 1854/5 Doggett's New York City directory containing tens of thousands of ghosts of mid-19th century Gotham We're accepting applications until August 20 (2014). The selected artist will receive:  EO Prototype Kit (approx. $400) 	$500 stipend 	Full rights to re-sell / re-share / re-display any work produced 	Time with Jacob Bijani, who leads the Electric Objects development team 	Time with the NYPL Labs team and Geospatial Librarian Matt Knutzen 	The opportunity to present your work at NYPL (physically and online) And we've assembled an awesome judges panel working at the intersection of digital maps and digital arts+crafts:  Alyssa Wright, Mapzen 	Aaron Cope, Cooper-Hewitt Labs 	Matt Knutzen, NYPL Map Division  	Zoë Salditch, Electric Objects 	Jacob Bijani, Electric Objects 	Mauricio Giraldo, NYPL Labs Get the full details at the Electric Objects artists page.  
