Today at the EDUCAUSE 2013 conference in Anaheim, I unveiled new research on textbook analytics. Textbook analytics are an emerging subcategory of learning analytics, which is the use of student-generated data to predict learning. These predictive analytics promise the ability to identify at-risk students and to help faculty adjust their teaching in real-time. However, up to now, learning analytics projects have collected limited data. Typical learning analytics systems are tied to Learning and Course Management Systems (LCMSs) and collect data like number of logins, number of discussion posts, etc. Additionally, research showing the predictive ability of learning analytics is limited because these studies relate grade-earning activity with course grades. In other words, students earn grades for discussion posts on LCMSs, so of course number of posts would be related to student course grades. Textbook analytics provide information on how much students are reading and how they are engaging with their digital textbooks. CourseSmart has developed a textbook analytics platform that unobtrusively calculates an Engagement Index based on how students are interacting with their textbook. CourseSmart provided data on 233 students including their Engagement Index scores, their background characteristics, and their final course grades. Using a blocked linear regression controlling for gender, race/ethnicity, and prior academic achievement (student transfer GPA), I found that the Engagement Index was significantly predictive of final course grades. In fact, the Engagement Index was a stronger predictor of final course grades than prior academic achievement (see figure below), which has been shown in previous research to be the strongest single predictor of student success.  What was especially interesting was that highlighting was related to student course outcomes, although not in the way that you might think. Those students who were in the top 10th percentile of number of highlights had significantly lower course grades than students in the lower 90th percentile. This is congruent with previous survey research showing that low-skill readers highlight more text and more often than high-skill readers. These results show that perhaps these types of analytics can identify students who need help with their reading skills. Textbook analytics open up possibilities for real-time and unobtrusive formative assessment for faculty. With a single index, instructors can gauge how much and how well students are engaging with their textbooks, identifying at-risk students before they ever turn in a gradable assignment or interact on the LCMS. Plus, textbook analytics open up possibilities for new methods to research student reading and its relationship to student outcomes.  You can read more about this in the CourseSmart research report : Evaluating How the CourseSmart Engagement Index Predicts Student Course Outcomes  
