Running parallel with this history of participatory surveying are   interrelated stories about other technologies that raise similar   questions about when and how participatory self-governance becomes a   reality.  India's historical experience with infrastructure has provided stark   examples of both redistribution and exclusion.  In the nineteenth   century, British engineers plowed the Deccan Plateau with canals that   protected many communities from drought, while simultaneously netting   food distribution into centralized networks of railroads, markets, and   taxation that penalized local communities and proliferate famine.  In   resistance to the British pattern of exclusion, post-independence   intellectuals labored to invent a form of governance characterized by   participation.In the 1970s, a number of anthropologists sympathetic with notions of  indigenous or ethnic wisdom began working on material relationships  under the influence of E. F. Schumacher and Gandhi wondering about  historical precedents for a small-scale, village-based political economy  in the control of self-directed communities.  One of these anthropologists was Steve Lansing, an American anthropologist whose work in the 1970s on Balinese water temples was taken up by Elinor Ostrom as a source of inspiration for her work on the commons.  In 2012, Lansing's presentation, retooled from a thesis in the history of archaeology to a metaphor for the spontaneous emergence of order on the internet, spiralled to the top of the Poptech talks.When this work was new, in the 1970s, it was embraced by civil engineers and nonprofits rather than internet startups as a possible guide to resilient, decentralized systems.  Many drew inspiration from these romantic accounts of India's   village past.  In the 1980s, Indian environmentalists like Anil Agarwal   began to lobby for the revival of medieval temple tanks for water   storage, drawing on a British anthropological tradition of describing   India's heritage as an ancient commons dedicated to protecting the   rights of all.The power of this myth had a profound effect on   legislation.  By the 1990s, most major towns in India had passed laws   mandating rainwater catchment on all buildings.  By 1996, participatory   organization was officially mandated for all activities supported by  the  Indian state.  These acts enshrined the conception of the ancient   commons, as revived by British anthropologists, Gandhian political   economists, and modern-day environmentalists, as a fundamental good. Powerful though this commitment is, however, its results in practice are   questionable.  Recent observers have reported that decentralized   interventions like temple tanks, rainwater catchment, and local   neighborhood groups had problems in recharging a groundwater table on a   regional scale.  Temple tanks were revived sporadically and rarely   maintained; unfunded mandates were insufficient to provision the city   with rainwater catchments. Neighborhood groups spend their energies   currying favors with local political parties to maintain water   connections, rather than lobbying for broadcast change in the water   allocation system at large.  These stories suggest the challenges of   negotiating resources at different scales.  What can we learn from   India's massive experiment with participatory technologies?  Are   decentralized water collection mechanisms capable of creating meaningful   environmental interventions on a regional and national scale?
