Happy New Year! First a word of thanks to everyone who visited our blog, Digital Humanities Tool Box, and History Pin BoardsÂ this year. Â Both Rob and I appreciate your comments and emails and hope to hear from many more of you in 2013. Image courtesy of http://serc.carleton.edu/images/sp/library/media/social_media.jpg If you have been following along with us in 2012 you know that Rob and I blog on an array of topics from teaching to research to the job market and everything in between. Â We are historians by training but teach a range of courses in multiple disciplines. Â Our research often stretches the boundaries of our subdisciplines and we are keen to understand and utilize new tools in innovative ways. Like many of you, we are interested in the digital humanities and in particular we are interested in how digital tools can make teaching, research, service and communication better. Â We didn’t have any access to digital training or coursework in our graduate training but we now find ourselves in a position where we are teaching with and about digital tools. Over the past year we have both thought quite a bit about the digital world and where we, our teaching, our students and our research fit in. Â We come across interesting examples of digital work and innovative researchers and teachers that are pushing the limits of traditional scholarship every day. Â Some of it goes in one ear and out the other but more of it resonates deeply with us and inspires us to think and teach in different ways. Maybe what resonates most is how much we still have to learn! Image courtesy of http://2.bp.blogspot.com/_70Gw2abmBeI/TPzyt_Jw-dI/AAAAAAAAA1Y/OVhFyWi-sJo/s1600/blogimage_book.jpg This fall I will be teaching (hopefully) a new undergraduate and a new graduate course both of which will be, in large part, introductions to digital humanities. Â  Over the next few months I will be planning these courses and will undertake my course designs this summer. Â I have decided to record my progress from square one to finished courses here on the blog and I hope you will follow along and interact with me as I go. Â To get started, I have decided to make the month of January Digital Humanities Month at Stillwater Historians. Â I am planning to post twice a week (likelyÂ Wednesdays and Fridays) for the month of January. Â I will be sharing tools and links, introducing ideas that might be of use and working through course planning. I hope that you will read along as I navigate my way through the world of digital humanities. Tomorrow Rob and I are off to the annual AHA conference in New Orleans. Â I am looking forward to getting out of the snow for a few days and to attending lots of great panels. Â In particular I am looking forward to attending THATCamp AHA. Â This will be my first THATCamp and I will be blogging and tweeting about my experiences. Â One of my THATCamp goals is to talk about course design and I have proposed a conversation here. We don’t generally spend time talking to each other about our teaching and how to design courses so I am really looking forward to the opportunity to chat with others about best practices. So follow along with us here and follow RobÂ and me on Twitter.Â You can also take a look at some of our 2012 posts relating to digital humanities here: Am I a Digital Historian? History Carnival 111: Environmental History Edition Pinning the Digital Humanities: Collaboration, Curation and Classrooms Summer Project: Start a Digital History Toolbox And you can read our most recent AcadiensisÂ article “‘Inviting Coworkers': Linking Scholars ofÂ Atlantic Canada on the Twitter Backchannel“ 
