I've decided to move to a different blogging platform: Ghost. All my old content is still around, but it's just a static copy of the former WordPress site.  "But WordPress has so many plugins and features," you say.  It does, but that's part of the problem. Blogs have grown into sites with feeds and toggles and social networking tie-ins. They've lost sight of their purpose: to connect people on their own terms.  I want this blog to be simple. It shouldn't have to give you a list of the top five things that strangers find useful, or encourage you to provide fodder to the commercial social networking world. That said, I am on Twitter as well as some other sites.  Blogs started as simple places where we published our thoughts. We could find other bloggers and read what they were thinking. If we wanted to follow them, we could add their RSS feed to our reader. No one had to buy in to a particular platform other than the open and free platform of the Internet and World Wide Web.  "Agency" is the term used to indicate a person's power over their own experience. You have agency when you choose what to wear to work. You do not have agency when your employer tells you what to wear. Agency is fundamental to free will with a meaningful choice. Choosing between cake or death is not an exercise in agency. This is why torture doesn't produce intelligence.   Compare e-mail with Facebook messaging. You can use any e-mail reader and service, but you have to use the official applications to use Facebook. In the same way, RSS and the Semantic Web try to maximize your agency because you can use any feed reader you like. You don't have to use Facebook to read my latest posts.   For now, I'm tweeting each time I post here, but I don't promise to do that forever. If you want to see when I post, add my RSS feed to your favorite reader.  Semantic Web  The other reason I'm starting with a simpler blog is to incorporate as much linked data as I can. The Friend of a Friend (foaf) specification does for people what RSS readers do for blogs: they allow you to assemble a collection of information that is computationally actionable in as open a way as possible.  My WebID card incorporates Friend of a Friend markup as RDFa. WebID is an emerging W3C recommendation for distributed identity management and authentication. It's an ambitious project that promises to make much of the social network-based authentication via OAuth obsolete, or at the least open things up so that your identity isn't dependent on a commercial provider. Instead of logging in to a site with Twitter or Facebook, you'll provide your WebID.  If you want similar results without waiting for the W3C to finalize WebID, check out Mozilla's Persona.  Schema.org is a good source of schemas for every day situations. As with much of the semantic web, it's a good start even for academic projects. Creating a skeleton of information that is useful outside the academy provides value even for non-scholars. Most people might not care about the nuances of handwriting differences in a manuscript, but they might find the relationships between people interesting.  More Writing  The last thing I want to do is write more. Even though I am not a perfect writer, I let the fear of imperfection paralyze me. The result is posts few and far apart.  My rule has been a thousand words (more or less) of well worded prose that makes a well-researched or thought out point.  I'm going to reword that rule a bit.  My new rule is to have up to a thousand words of writing in my own voice that traces a path through my thoughts. This is something closer to a real essay. I'll worry about polishing later.  I'll stick with things I'm interested in most: writing fiction and applying computation to human culture (a.k.a., digital humanities).
