It’s been a long time since I’ve blogged about cancer. Â Partly this is because being post-treatment is part of my life. Â But every year I go in for a scary scan, and every year it shows the same thing: there are some nodules in my lungs, probably metastatic thyroid cancer. Â They have been growing very slowly. Â This year’s scan showed the biggest one had grown by 3mm. Â Since 2011, it’s been “watchful waiting,” since the alternative they offered me was exploratory lung surgery that had no curative purpose–all it could do would be a positive diagnosis. This year, things are different. Â They have decided to do another dose of radioactive iodine, combined with lithium (this part is based on new research) which is supposed to make the cells hungrier for iodine. Â To refresh your memory, radioactive iodine is administered as a pill. Â I am then radioactive for a week and have to stay away from people. Â Happily, this can now be done as an outpatient treatment, so long as I have a toilet of my own. Â I managed to get it schedule while Carrie is giving a talk at Michigan October 30th. Â So I will be glowing for Halloween. Â Not actually, but I kind of wish I did glow. I went through RAI in March of 2010 and it was relatively painless apart from the unpleasantness of isolation and a hospital stay. Â There can be nausea the first day or two, and I couldn’t taste sour for about a month. Â For two weeks before I have to go on an insane low-iodine diet. Â (The diet is insane because iodine is in pretty much every processed food and most commercially available salt.) Â The outcomes of this year’s treatment,Â close to the 5th anniversary of my first thyroid cancer surgery, are unclear. Â It might do nothing. Â It might slow down the growth of the cells a little. Â It might clear them out a lot.Â  Or it might get rid of everything (for now), which would allow me to actually claim that I am in remission. Â We don’t know. Â But the risks are relatively low. Â And honestly, this is what I wanted them to try in 2011 when they found the growing spots in the first place. There’s not much else to say on this subjectÂ until mid-October. Â I may do a low-iodine food blog starting around October 15th, since that will be fun and experimental, and I’m not fresh off a 17-day hospital stay (as I was in 2010 when I last went on the diet). Â And there’s not much for you to do. Â Food gifts are unnecessary now and will be useless while I am on the low iodine diet, since if I don’t cook it myself and know exactly what’s in it, I won’t eat it. I owe the world a voice and swallowing update, butÂ I’ll write that separately AND BONUS NEWS: Unrelated to the latest treatment plan, I have created a website called http://cancerscapes.ca . Â I blogged my cancer experience in 2009-10, and now it can be read in proper form from beginning to end. Â I also made a series of audio projects during cancer treatment, and they are now all listenable (total duration=@30 minutes). Â The “..and this is my voice” piece was Â anthologized by New Adventures in Sound Art in 2011. Cancerscapes is a living archive. Â The text section of Cancerscapes will automatically add new entries as well, like this one. Â And who knows, there may someday be more audio to include.
