In a market society, Capital is given the lion’s share of policy concern and consideration. This has allowed capital to reinterpret labour law to shift has much of the cost of labour training onto the public purse, all the while claiming that the profit margins are too tight for regulatory tinkering. This rhetoric is little more ensuring that in the absence of suitable administrative oversight capital can maintain control over the production process.Beyond the need of a reserve workforce, capital has always fantasised about all labour being self-supported and ready at the beck of capitalists. With the recentralization of the formal workforce under adherence to ‘lean production’ principles this is almost being made good one. The pretence is that workers are entrepreneurial subcontractors. But this more resembles sharecroppering insofar that there is an illusion that they are freely choosing their life-course (and sometimes they are insofar that the system allows them to do so) but these persons are still beholden an system which has shifted the risk from capital to workers; the worker now carries a greater share of the risk of business as opposed to capitalists. There is also the asymmetrical information of the process that capital withholds from workers. This recentralization was designed.While some workers may find decentralization conducive to their immediate interests, by far it favours the employee. This is because when a formal central workplace exists conditions are amenable to labour organization and the possible disruption of production. This gives workers leverage to increase their shares and stakes. By contrast, in a decentralised workplace organised labour loses potential power. They have little to bargain with. Chances of successful contention diminish at this point. This reorganization reduces the potential for workplace contention between organised labour and capital, replacing it with individuated direct dealings, and utility determined on a case-by-case basis. This might be fine in some circumstances, as persons can gain due reward for their ability and contribution. But in an economy where barriers to access to higher education lowered, there seems little by which people can differentiate their skill sets and knowledge. Thus the unique grounds for wage and salary barging are undermined. So this labour strategy no longer becomes viable for the individual. For the worker, two options seem open. The first is add additional skill to their repertoire. These go by various names: ‘soft-skills,’ ‘people skills,’ ‘cross-skilling.’ For service sector and knowledge workers, these skills often have to be acquired at their own expense (and possibly financed with debt.) For other kinds of workers, these skills often relate to affective intangibles which are normally distinctive to personality type. Courses in attaining these affective skills have proliferated on certain attitude are to teach persons to gain these skills. Indeed, as the primary skill set is fairly widely available, these intangibles becomes the basis of hiring decisions. And it no longer seems contentious for an organization to set an personality characteristic as a job requirement. The second option is to bargain by appealing to contribution. Thus individual desert enters into the equation. But given how susceptible inputs are to suitable circumstances, desert claims require that workers guard favourable circumstances when they find them. They are also likely to clamor to claim credit or distribute blame as they see fit. Increasingly workers are in competition with other because they are well aware that they are interchangeable.An additional benefit of the decentralization is that short-term contracting and rotating labour force leaves little local labour memory, and employees have to heed demands to increase their productive capacities, or they shall not be kept for the next project. Simply, decentralization has shifted the balance of power to employers, such that people now live in precarious circumstances, highly individuated work and workplace with little room to confront employers. Hence hiring can be made on the basis of affective servitude, and the willingness of a worker to ‘promote the brand.’ This is nothing less than the subordination of oneself to the goals and purpose of the company as a whole, as opposed to simply being a place to work. And if a person does not wish to do so, this will factor into the decision of whether their contract will be renewed. Within this hiring mode, labour docility and corporate sycophancy are desired attributes.Capital has increased workplace flexibility, discouraged unionization, particularly in white collar professions as a way to forestall the increase of labour costs in an economy that is increasingly becoming white collar and service-orientated. Herein labour’s overriding value is determined by immediate cost to company, not say their possible contribution to long term investments. Any potential labour renaissance has to work around these realities. But labour movements are fragmented. What collective action there is, is largely defensive, seeking to hold onto the provisions and privileges. But this bargaining is often at the expense of new and future hires who will not be extended the same provision. This position makes it difficult for workers to organise economically.Returning to the workplace, the more in demand the skill happens to be, the more a person will be enticed to stay with the company, seek to incentive their stay, through the offering of stock options and the like. The one thing going for skills in demand is that they have economic mobility, either through international operations, or by deciding to go to other companies. The downside of this is that the stock option are tied to the company’s performance, and that this is a fictitious value, and potential value that be deflated at any given point due to information asymmetry. The history of Enron is a case in point.Decentralization of the workplace is but a means for capital to push portions of risk onto the labour force and population as a whole. There is historical precedent for this circumstance. E.P. Thompson labelled this phenomenon the outworker: The proletarian outworker, who worked in his own home, sometimes owned and sometimes rented his loom, and who wove up the yarns to the specifications of the factory or agent of a mill or of some middleman.[1]So this is a persistent problem of capitalism as it makes people surplus to production without granting them the dividends of that production process. [1] Thompson, E.P., (1964) The Making of the English Working Class, New York: Pantheon Books, p299
