It is really easy to hate your job. When I found myself singing “Everything is terrible forever” to myself recently (to the tune of “Do you want to build a snowman?” fromÂ Frozen), it hit me that Â if I’m frustrated with some projects to the point of making up grim showtunes, there were some books I needed to reread.   Save the Assistants, Lilit Marcus Starve Better, Nick Mamatas Booklife, Jeff Vandermeer   Over the years since I got those books, I’ve had Â moments that made me want to get the fuck out of publishing. These were my books to rally with. If I needed assurance that I would one day not be stuck in an untenable place work wise, I read Save the Assistants. It’s comforting and catty, and has some simple advice on hanging on to your sanity while you ripcord from a bad job to a better one. It’s like watching the cool part in a chick flick where the heroine says she will give no more fucks about things that don’t matter, and pursues her career goal with more zeal than most people have in their pinkie. Starve Better is a manual for, well, starving better. I wouldn’t be a writer if I was in it for the sweet room full of gold coins, but it pays the bills. Nick’s book, if you follow the advice, will make you more aware of the ways you can make money off your writing now instead of dying of malnutrition while writing the Great American Novel. Get paid for stuff that isn’t the Great American Novel, because you can’t write it if you’re dead. Booklife isn’t wholly applicable to everything I do as a writer, but it’s invaluable for making me assess where I am with my work at the time I crack it open. If I feel like I’m stagnating or lost, and I don’t have the time to talk about it for hours with a friend, this is what I reach for. It’s a book that makes me plan, and think about what writing I want in my future future. Make notes, write in the margins, get my thoughts out about what I’m doing now Â v. what I want to be doing. Uncomfortable as a process goes, it’s still necessary for me. Had I ever been given the chance to give all three to someone else, I’d probably call them Books For Hating Life Less. That’s what I use them for, at least. 
