Some aforementioned lipsticks, and my favorite makeup bag in the world. Lipstick is one of my favorite cosmetics. Even if you’re not wearing any other makeup, it can be a little buoy of confidence, something to cheer you up, or a little pop of colour to make you feel pretty just when you need it. I wanted to share a few of the lipstick companies in my makeup kit, with a FYI that I typically choose cool tones. I tend to look cartoonish and a little jaundiced in warmer shades.   Kat Von D You can snag these spiky, punk-packaged lipsticks at Sephora, and if you like cool purples or raspberries, you should check out my favorites: Wolvesmouth and Bauhau5. Her Chrysalis eyeshadow palette is also incredible, and her pressed powder blushes are ridiculously easy to blend. And her eyeliners. Did I mention it’s a great makeup line?   Rituel de Fille You can find Rituel’s products at their website, as well as many of their lovely stockists. I highly recommend Against Nature, Love In Madness, Written In Blood, and Fortune Teller. If you’re brand new to cream blushes, Rituel’s are some of the best I’ve found. They give a nice subtle dash of colour, or you can build them up to a brighter hue with layered application.   Besame Cosmetics Did you watch Agent Carter? I bet you did. Her lipstick was none other than their Red Velvet. One of my friends picked out their Merlot shade for me, and I adore them both. Because they’re modeled on vintage cosmetics, the packaging, size, and the shape of the lipstick itself will probably feel unfamiliar in the hand at first. The tube feels metallic, and the lipstick isn’t that sharp single peak like most modern lipstick, it’s actually more of a sloping A shape at the top. Don’t worry about it, though, because it’s still easy to apply, and requires very little getting used to. Atomic Cosmetics They’re local! They’re full of glitter! And they’re run by a biochemist doing her damndest to keep the scarier chemicals in life out of your cosmetics. Â My current favorite lipsticks from Atomic are Jinxed, and Cabaret. I also use a BB cream from Atomic, as well as one of their foundations. If you’re in Seattle (or just passing through) I cannot emphasize how much fun it is to shop there. melt cosmetics Taking your first steps into unusual, wild shades of lipstick? Melt is a great first outing. I have a tube of Dark Room, which is a lovely beet purple. And Monday, May 11th, they’re having a sale. 25% off all their cosmetics, and the sale code is meltmilli. Sale runs from 12 a.m. – 12 a.m. PST.   If you dig my makeup bag and want one of your own, look no further than Concrete Minerals. Their eyeshadows are equally amazing. 
