When it comes to beauty products that my friends want to talk about, my nail polish collection is at the top of the list. Today, I’m sharing a number of links to some of the sites I’ve bought many of my favorite polishes from. Mckfresh Polishes. Mckfresh Nail Attire With shades with names like “Horrorland,” it’s no wonder this is one of my favorite Australian brands. With spooky names and tons of glitter, this is the line for you if you like rich, dark jewel tones, or bright summery holos. Available via Femme Fatale Cosmetics and their Etsy. Femme Fatale Cosmetics FFC is an Australian company that ships overseas (yes!), and carries an abundance of nail polish and other cosmetics. I’m fairly partial to Femme Fatale’s own brand of nail polish, and I’m pretty sure they’re who I bought my very first bottle of Pretty Serious Cosmetics polish from. In addition to a number of polishes and cosmetics under the Femme Fatale Cosmetics brand, they also carry a variety of Australian, European and U.S. brands. Beautyhabit This is where I’ve bought most of my uslu airlines nail polish, but they carry a number of cosmetics, perfume and spa product items. They’re a great stop if you’re looking for something a little unusual for a gift. Zoya One of my favorite brands, Zoya is a great polish for anyone just getting into the swing of doing their own nails. The consistencty of the polish, the brush and the top all feel natural to grip and use. I have shaky hands, but the more natural a grip feels, the easier it is for me to use that polish. My hands down favorite from them is Trixie, an incredible silver metallic shade. Llarowe Llarowe carries a number of indie nail polish brands, in addition to their own line of polishes. They’re fast, efficient, and carry an excellent array of shades and companies. Color4Nails I’ve chased down some indie nail polish that was out at other stockists through them, and I have zero complaints about them. Fast, well packaged, reasonable selection. Harlow & Co. A Canadian company that I’ve ordered from multiple times, Harlow carries both North American and overseas brands. I’ve discovered some neat companies through their site. Their speciality is nail polish, but they carry a number of lip products and other cosmetics as well. Cirque Colors Holographic shades abound with some lovely creme colours, as well as a number of shimmers and multichromes. Personal favorites of mine include Arcane Fire and Epoch. Spell Polish Shades run the gamut from shimmery metallics to some of the most aggresive holos you’ll ever find, and their packaging is gorgeous. U.S. based, so shipping is swift inside the States. Available on their website and via their Etsy. ILNP I Love Nail Polish has ultra-chrome flakies, chromes and holos in its arsenal, making it likely that there’s something for everyone among their shades. I love the weight of ILNP bottles, which does a lot to allay my fears that I’m going to knock a bottle over mid-manicure. Their polish lasts well, and I’d say is much more vibrant in person than on a monitor.Â Available on their website and via their Etsy. With luck, some of these stockists will inspire you to try new shades, companies, and enliven your own nail polish collections. 
