The Göttingen Dialog in Digital Humanities (GDDH) has established a new forum for the discussion of digital methods applied to all areas of the Humanities, including Classics, Philosophy, History, Literature, Law, Languages, Social Science, Archaeology and more. The initiative is organized by the Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities (GCDH). The dialogs will take place every Tuesday at 5pm from late April until early July 2015 in the form of 90 minute seminars. Presentations will be 45 minutes long and delivered in English, followed by 45 minutes of discussion and student participation. Seminar content should be of interest to humanists, digital humanists, librarians and computer scientists. We invite submissions of complete papers describing research which employs digital methods, resources or technologies in an innovative way in order to enable a better or new understanding of the Humanities, both in the past and present. Themes may include text mining, machine learning, network analysis, time series, sentiment analysis, agent-based modelling, or efficient visualization of big and humanities-relevant data. Papers should be written in English. Successful papers will be submitted for publication as a special issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ). Furthermore, the author(s) of the best paper will receive a prize of €500, which will be awarded on the basis of both the quality and the delivery of the paper. A small budget for travel cost reimbursements is available. Full papers should be sent by March 20th to gkraft@gcdh.de in Word .docx format. There is no limitation in length but the suggested minimum is 5000 words. The full programme, including the venue of the dialogs, will be sent to you by April 1st. For any questions, do not hesitate to contact gkraft@gcdh.de For further information and updates, visit http://www.gcdh.de/en/events/gottingen-dialog-digital-humanities/ GDDH Board (in alphabetical order): Camilla Di Biase-Dyson (Georg August University Göttingen) Marco Büchler (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Jens Dierkes (Göttingen eResearch Alliance) Emily Franzini (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Greta Franzini (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Angelo Mario Del Grosso (ILC-CNR, Pisa, Italy) Berenike Herrmann (Georg August University Göttingen) Péter Király (Gesellschaft für wissenschaftliche Datenverarbeitung mbH Göttingen) Gabriele Kraft (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Bärbel Kröger (Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities) Maria Moritz (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Sarah Bowen Savant (Aga Khan University, London, UK) Oliver Schmitt (Gesellschaft für wissenschaftliche Datenverarbeitung mbH Göttingen) Sree Ganesh Thotempudi (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities) Jörg Wettlaufer (Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities & Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities) Ulrike Wuttke (Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities) This event is financially supported by the German Ministry of Education and Research (No. 01UG1509).
