When I was 12 years old, I went with my family to see the Robin Williams movie Dead Poets Society. One of the movie’s main characters is a troubled, sensitive teenager whose actions are controlled by his overbearing father. Here’s the description, pulled from Wikipedia, of one of the key events of the film (warning: contains spoilers): Without his father’s knowledge, he auditions for the role of Puck in a production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream. His father finds out and orders Neil to withdraw. Neil asks Keating for advice and is advised to talk to his father and make him understand how he feels, but Neil cannot muster the courage to do so. Instead he goes against his father’s wishes. His father shows up at the end of the play, furious. He takes Neil home and tells him that he intends to enroll him in a military school to prepare him for Harvard University and a career in medicine. Unable to cope with the future that awaits him or to make his father understand his feelings, Neil commits suicide. It’s hard for me to put into words how powerfully I reacted to Neil’s story. Twelve-year-old me, tortured by a constant feeling that I was different, that I was wrong, felt a deep connection to Neil. It was right around this time that I realized I was gay; that realization was paired with a certainty that I would have to hide my gayness from the world for my entire life. I felt in Neil a queerness that matched the queerness growing inside me. So, when Neil chose suicide, my heart broke for both of us. I sobbed through the final minutes of the movie, cried quietly in the car, then slunk off to my room to cry in privacy for god knows how long. Last night, at this year’s LGBTQ Pride Film Festival, the Quarryland Men’s Chorus performed a song by Stephen Schwartz called “Testimony.” It’s a song written in response to the “It Gets Better” Project, and although there’s no footage that I know of yet from the Quarryland performance, I’m including a video of the San Francisco Gay Men’s Chorus singing the song. Watching this performance last night, I was brought powerfully back to my experience of watching Dead Poets Society, sitting in the dark, surrounded by my family and very much alone. It gets better, I’m happy to report. It gets amazing. But I didn’t know that at the time. At the time I only knew that I couldn’t be what I knew I was. At the time I only knew that I didn’t know how to live inside myself.                 Tweet This Post  
