What happens when we x-ray an organization and see how it is structured -- how it really works?  Here, the organizational x-ray is performed via social network analysis [SNA], using InFlow software.We normally view our organizations as hierarchies, or pyramids, with the top executive at the top of the structure.  Figure 1 below is a hierarchical view of the top 3 layers in an I/T department in California.  Figure 1 - HierarchyPeople are represented by nodes, the color of the nodes represent their level in the organization, and the black lines designate reporting relationships.  The larger magenta-colored node is the CIO, the green nodes are the I/T Directors and the blue nodes are the I/T managers.  No lower levels in the organization were mapped for this analysis.  Names of people and departments have been hidden for privacy.Instead of a hierarchy as a pyramid, view it as a network! Most hierarchies are viewed as a pyramidal structure with the highest executive on top.  Some have tried new views of hierarchies, such as tilting them on their side, or showing them upside down to support their new theories of management.  These views have not caught on.  A better alternative to viewing a hierarchy as a pyramid, is to view it as a network!  Mathematicians label hierarchical networks as trees.  The tree view is shown in Figure 1 above.  We can move our point of observation, without changing the organizational structure, and see our I/T organization as a Hub-and-Spoke network in Figure 2 below.Figure 2 - Hub and SpokeBoth views above show the exact same organization with the exact same links between nodes -- we have just moved our point of observation!  Now the CIO is in the center of Figure 2 instead of on top in Figure 1.  The black lines still show reporting relationships, and the node colors reveal organization level, as before.  We have added gold frames around each department in Figure 2, but otherwise Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the exact same organization!  We now realize that a Hierarchy and a Hub-and-Spoke network are the exact same thing, just from a different angle.X-rays are usually good for revealing the bones and hard tissue inside the human body.  Our skeleton and cartilage are like the rigid formal structure of the organization -- the prescribed network of who works where, and who reports to whom.  Our bodies have other important membranes and systems and so do organizations! Here is where SNA really shines -- it not only works as an X-Ray, but also as an MRI.  Like an MRI, SNA reveals the soft, emergent, action membranes that support how things really work in an organization.  Other key systems inside an organization include: Work Flow/CollaborationIdea Flow/InnovationKnowledge Exchange/LearningAdvice-seeking/ExpertiseVoice of the Customer/FeedbackFriendship/Social NetsFigure 3 below shows our I/T department with both Hierarchy and Work Flow -- who actually works with whom.  Just like an MRI is more complex (shows more information & intersections) than an X-Ray, Figure 3 is more complex than Figures 1 and 2.  We have also added in Node numbers (as substitutes for employee names) in Figure 3 so that we can better discuss and make sense of the emergent patterns revealed.Figure 3 - WirearchyThe gray lines, added to our Hub-and-Spoke view of the organization reveal the actual working relationships between the management staff in this I/T department.  The gray links show the strong work ties between a pair of managers.  These work relationships have emerged over time as the organization went about it's business.  The CIO was very happy to see the criss-crossing work ties between the various departments.  He was afraid his organization was stuck in silos, created by the many mergers his company had gone through.  He was glad to see that the managers from acquired companies A, B, and C were now working together well.We see that the hierarchy is just another network in an organization -- the networks all work together for the organization to execute its goals.  This combination of prescribed and emergent networks is called a Wirearchy, by Jon Husband.Finally, if we want to look at just the soft tissue inside an organization, we can remove the prescribed network [hierarchy] and just look at the emergent networks.  The InFlow software re-arranges the organization based on the actual links between people and we see an "MRI" of the emergent organization in Figure 4 below.Figure 4 - Emergent OrganizationThe organization view above is a layout based on actual work connections -- people that work together, and work with common others, show up nearby on the map.  This allows us to see clusters, core members, and outliers.  With a hierarchy/pyramid we talk about Top and Bottom.  In a network we talk about Core and Periphery(center and edges).  These structural locations are similar, yet different -- one is assigned, and the other is earned. Your location in the hierarchy is based on you job title.  Your network location is based on your Capabilities, Connections, and Communication [C3] -- irregardless of your job title. Another benefit of SNA is that it not only draws maps of the organization, but measures them also!  Key network locations are revealed by network measures.  Figure 4 above shows the individual betweenness measures for the employees in the network.  The betweenness measure reveals the brokers and connectors within the organization.  Again, we use node numbers instead of names to protect privacy.  But, if our clients want to see the actual names it is just a click of the mouse to change the node labels to an employee names.Would you like to see inside your organization?We can apply an X-ray/MRI to Big Data also!
