Although the MGB blog’s been pretty quiet this year, I’ve started some research on hotel and motel sites in south Jersey, particular the shore towns south of Atlantic City, and while I’m not yet ready to post much from that effort, I find something to share that I’d like to know more about. Â In hunting around for material about the Hotel de Griff in Cape May, NJ, online, I came across this:  According to the Wisconsin Historical Society, which hosts this document online and holds it in their collection, this is the Negro Business Directory of the State of Wisconsin 1950-1951, written and edited by one M.E. Shadd. Â  Publications like the Green Books and Travelguide came out of the tradition of Negro Business Directories, which were published by communities going back to the 19th century. They usually included churches, educational institutions, funeral parlors, insurance agents, and other professional offices as well as small businesses that were owned and run within the black community. Directories often included several essays in the beginning for the book that would describe their purpose and highlight the most prominent endeavors of members of that city or town. Listings for the most important people and institutions were often full page profiles with professionally shot photographs. They can be seen as both a utilitarian tool for helping people find black-owned businesses that would serve them, and a way to promote the accomplishments of African American doctors, lawyers, clergy, and other educated professionals. Directories say, “we are here” Â in a number of ways. Â M.E.Shadd’s directory from 1950 for Wisconsin is part of this tradition. The book has Â the same kinds of listings traditionally found in Negro Directories, like this one for an attorney.  And this page, which features the Milwaukee Urban League Guild:  It also features, toward the back of the book, a national listing of “Hotels (Owned and operated for or by Negro people).” Â A state by state listing Â follows, which includes the Hotel de Griff (this is how I found it) and a few other lodgings. The Wisconsin directory is interesting because it’s a kind hybrid between the old style of local Negro Directory and the national hotel and travel guides, and even offers a motto,Â "Enjoy your vacation without humiliation,“ that is close variant on Travelguide’s "Recreation without Humiliation.” The Shadd directory is also interesting because of M.E. Shadd herself. Although I’ve found a tremendous amount of evidence that women worked, owned, and ran many of the recreation and lodging businesses that catered to African Americans throughout the twentieth century, this is the first time I’ve found a travel guide that was written and published by a woman. Here she is, in the editors note at the beginning of the book.Â   
