During my not entirely planned hiatus from this project, I’ve been quietly collecting objects and artifacts. One of them, my favorite, perhaps my most treasured and rich acquisition so far, is sitting in front of me on my dining room table. I’ve been looking at it for a couple of months now, and I am a little afraid of it, the way you might be afraid of a piece of jewelry that is too nice to wear on your quotidian rounds.  It’s a scrapbook, the way that people used to make scrapbooks–with care and attention to each page and its composition. And from what I can tell, it was made by an African American schoolteacher from Richmond, VA, a woman who traveled around the U.S. with a group of fellow teachers in about 1947.Â  It appears from some of the articles pasted into its very fragile pages, that she was traveling with a group known as the “Pals Club”, who had taken a month-long trip to the West and the Grand Canyon. If the barriers to an undertaking like this were formidable, they were not alone in tackling them. Schoolteachers, and you could look to Mary McLeod Bethune amongÂ  many others,Â  were among the first and most ambitious African American tourists and travelers after World War II. It’s also a spatial document, a kind of map of its own that describes a particular itinerary, a set of interests, a navigation through segregation or in spite of it, toward the kinds of sights that lots of people wanted to see after the war was finally over–Mission Delores, the Grand Canyon, New Orleans. The pages are filled with brochures, cards, paper souvenirs, maps, postcards and other ephemera from hotels, churches, tourist sites, restaurants, and cab services, among others. It is the kind object you really want to find, but never do. When you study cultural history in the post-mass-production era, you have this problem of material, because so much of what you look at–your evidence, whatever it might be–has been mass produced and distributed in a way that makes it impossible to know what people might have thought about it. Contrast this with my friends who study 18th century history who can track down who published a book and, through the publisher’s records, determine who ordered it, and when. How would you do that with a postcard? or a travel guide? So this scrapbook is kind of the holy grail for a 20thc historian of vernacular, or everyday, history: a highly personal, specific and datable commentary on mass-produced material. On the cover, as if to make sure I get it, there is nothing but three words: “An Ideal Scrap Book."Â  But it is also part of someone’s life, someone who may or may not be alive today, and who might have family and friends. So, this is both exciting because they could be found and interviewed, and completely intimidating because this is an intimate part of someone’s life that requests both sensitivity and humility. So in the next few weeks, I’ll start tracking down the woman who made this scrapbook. I’ll find out her name, and where she taught–there weren’t very many schools in Richmond that taught and employed African American teachers–where she lived and who the Pals Club was and where else they might have traveled. I’ll might make a little map of all the places she and the Pal’s Club visited as documented by the scrapbook. And at some point, I’ll give it away, to the NMAAHC, if they want it for their collections, or to a local museum in Richmond, or even back to the family, because it shouldn’t stay here, it should be seen.
