 7.20.12 | at desk A few weeks back, when I was out at the NEH Institute, I went on a driving tour of Central Avenue in Los Angeles with Dell Upton. If you’ve never been on a tour with a couple of architectural historians, it basically consists of driving around for multiple hours without stopping while clutching various lists of addresses in hand. It’s a very particular kind of pleasure. And so it was for us. Armed with our complementary lists of sites, a GPS and some cameras, we killed a few hours on a lazy Sunday afternoon driving around the historically African American section of LA–Central, Jefferson, Adams.Â  I got to see some of the major LA hotel sites from the travel guides from my list, including the Dunbar (Sommerville) Hotel, the Paul Williams-designed YMCA, the Lincoln Hotel and a few others. On Dell’s music-focused list, we saw the homes of Bill Bojangles (also Paul Williams), Eric Dolphy, and Hampton Hawes. I even got a bonus drive by of Marvin Gay’s house. I saw more things than I could list here, but most of all I got to see how the neighborhoods wereÂ  organized, the industrial areas that cut them off from and shaped their growth, and the way in which they’ve continued to evolve as more hispanic families have moved in. Can’t get that from a book. Or a map. But these were the success. Many of the sites on my list were no longer there, especially the lesser known clubs and hotels. Toward the end of the day, we drove down Jefferson AvenueÂ  looking for the La Dale Motel. I didn’t have much expectation of finding it.Â  The La Dale was one of two or three motels with the same name at different addresses listed in the guides from the late 1950s. They weren’t very fancy and didn’t have any associations that might have caused them to be retained that I knew of. But low and behold, there it was:  Pretty much completely intact. I was pretty excited. Later Dell did some digging and it turned out the La Dale Motels and Hotels were the business venture of one Jack Lauderdale.Â  Lauderdale owned Downbeat Record Store in the late 1940s and a label called Swing Time in the 1950s. Lauderdale and Swing Time, along with John Dolphin’s legendary shop, Dolphin Records, had been central pillars in the jazz and r+b scene in LA in the 1950s. It was a great little find that tied the travel and hotel sites of my list withÂ  music-related sites on Dell’s list. So the La Dale was much more than a little motel in the landscape, it was part of the whole fabric of the music scene in 50s Los Angeles that would influence the evolution of post-war jazz (and art, I might argue) all over the world. For further reading, here are the two posts that Dell found about Lauderdale and Swing Time Records.
