6.30.12 | ucla Below I’ve posted a prototype of the kind of mapping exercises I’ve been working on while at the NEH Summer Seminar at UCLA for the last two weeks–in part because I felt like I needed to show that I am actually making things, but also to illustrate the challenges of doing this kind of project. This is what building an argument is like in this medium. So the video below is a quick snapshot of lodging, food and auto services listed in the Green Book and other guides in California from about 1939 to about 1960. With a Legend, more complete data, and a few tweaks so that you could see it a little better, it would be a simple way to where and when these businesses developed.Â  But given that it took me the better part of a very focused day to make even this clumsy version, it demonstrates the importance of thinking through your argument before you sit down to create a visualization. Other than a snapshot of how/where travel sites are appearing, what kinds of questions does this exercise satisfy? The answer is, Not Many. It does, if you look very closely, raise some questions. Unsurprisingly if you know anything about Los Angeles, most of the businesses cluster around Central,and as time moves forward you can see them moving south down the spine of the avenue. There is also a suggestion of a kind of zoning that takes place over time. Some parts of the central district seem to split off and attract clusters of like business–garages, gas stations, auto services–for example.Â  And, also unsurprisingly,Â  its clear that state-wide, the sites are attaching along main highways and at the border crossings of Nevada and Mexico. But there are wide swaths of the state where there just isn’t much. Is that because everything was open? in other words, are there no places listed in the guides for these areas because it was generally known that these areas didn’t discriminate? I would say no. Anecdotally, and from the personal accounts I’ve read, people didn’t take chances if they didn’t know a place.Â  But that’s an open question too. After a pretty intensive week of trying to build out the maps in various forms and on various platforms, I realize I need to work smarter. I think there’s a kind of balance that has to be struck between waiting to see what the visualizations might show us and building them with a certain intention or thought that they might support a pre-existing idea. There’s always some kind of hypotheses driving the process of making these maps, but I also want to leave it open to see what the maps might show us, otherwise there isn’t much point. I’ve only got one or two working days left here and quite a bit to pull together before I present on Tuesday morning, so I will want to be strategic about the kind of visualizations I try to build. Â  How can I build something that is actually a form of research in and of itself, and not just a representation of research I’ve already done?
