 Screen Shot from The Knotted Line, which the authors describe as: “an interactive, online art project that looks at the historical relationships between incarceration, education and labor in the United States from 1495-2025.” Built using the Scalar platform. 5.29.12 | at desk Somehow, in a complete social media failure of character, I missed the news that the Center for New Media and History, right here at the Center for History andÂ  New Media at George Mason University, is hosting a THATCamp in a few weeks. If you don’t know what a THATCamp is, essentially it brings together a cohort of people who are broadly interested in the use of technology in the humanities for a few days to talk and teach each other things. It’s called an UNconference, as there is no planned sessions, only whatever session topics the attendees want to participate inÂ  and facilitate. Since it’s so late, I was only able to put myself on the waiting list, which is a bit heartbreaking since there are already several Omeka sessions I want to attend. Now that I’m done spending all my money on ebay collecting maps of post-war California, I am turning my attention to learning some of the platform and applications that are out there. The web has always been a great place for learning about, well, itself–tutorials abound. Here’s a list of some of the things I’ll be looking at and trying to get a little competence in over the next week: -note, this is just my preliminary understanding of these applications, so there may be some errors.  Scalar: This is a digital publishing platform that is being developed at USC. It works essentially off the model of a book or article–with pages as the central metaphor–and that is what it is for. In addition to the media-enriched page models, it has flexible navigation and organization that allows the user as well as the author to configure the article or project in various ways. I’ve put a screen shot of Scalar’s navigation template above, so you can see what I mean.Â  It is designed to be user-friendly in the sense that authoring does not require a programmer or advanced skills in tech.Â  Scalar is one of the responses to the current problematic paradigm for Academic publishing. Developing the right platform (there have been various attempts at this in the past) is step one, but step two is getting the Scholarly community to accept it as equivalent to or even–gasp–superior to the print model upon which so much teaching and tenuring is based. Not sure what the economic/requirements model will be yet as it is still in beta. Sample Project: The Knotted Line is a beautiful and amazing project built in Scalar. I have no idea how they did it but I need to learn. Omeka: Omeka is essentially a Content Management System for art and objects. It’s big institutional users are museums and cultural organizations and it allows users to create and display research and narrative based on the user’s collections–in other words, online exhibits.Â  Omeka was developed by CHNM and is free+open-source, but requires a server install. There is also an option for individuals who don’t have a server, but I’m not sure if the functionality is attenuated in some way. Sample Project: Lincoln at 200 has two exhibits that were built using Omeka. Omeka +Neatline: Neatline is a plug-in for Omeka that was developed at the Scholar’s Lab at UVA. The Scholar’s Lab was the first place this project got its feet under it, and the staff remains an important touchstone for me. I actually talked a little with the developer about this plug in before they released the beta and I was pretty excited about what it might do.Â  Neatline allows Omeka users to locate their collections geo-temporally. This means you can create a timeline for you collection, map your collection–or put them together, which is what I am hoping to do. Sample Project: I don’t know who is using this yet as it was only released in February, but I’m going to email the developers and see what they can tell me. Google SketchUp: This is Google’s free software for designing and modeling buildings in 3D, which can then be placed onto Google Earth maps. Many professionals and architecture students use this program as well. SketchUp recently announced they were leaving Google for Trimble, so we’ll have to see how this will effect functionality, etc. Sample Project: Here is a drawing of a town-center, done in Sketch Up by an 8th grader. I’m sure I could find one done by a 5 year old if I tried hard enough. There is also an excellent set of tutorials hosted by the WIRED! center at Duke University that describe how some of these applications can and are used in Art and Architectural History projects specifically, so I’ll be heading over there once I’ve absorbed all the other tutorials sufficiently.Â  Off to work–just writing this has made me excited about this stuff all over again…
