Editathons in action March has raced by, and while April is nearly upon us Wikimedia UK has a programme of events for everyone. The month kicks off with a Wiki Hour of Power at the University of Edinburgh students, staff, and academics are invited to spend their lunch hour editing Wikipedia. It’s a monthly event, and the last one coincided with International Women’s Day. Editathons are a great way to get together with other people to improve Wikipedia as a team and learn how to edit. So there are events at the University of Lancaster, the National Library of WalesÂ (not once but twice!), and the National Maritime MuseumÂ in Greenwich. There are five meetups scheduled this month across Leeds (12th April), London (12th April), Oxford (19th April), Edinburgh (22 April), and Manchester (26 April). Most take place on the weekends, except for the one in Edinburgh which is on a Wednesday. It’s an opportunity to meet other Wikimedians. There is a full list of upcoming meetupsÂ so you can find one near you, and if there isn’t one perhaps it’s time to start one yourself! For those of you with a GLAMorous side,Â GLAM-Wiki 2015 organised by Wikimedia Netherlands takes place in The Hague in the middle of the month. Closer to home the GLAM Committee will be discussing all things related to Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums on 21 April. Join the conversation to learn about what the charity does in this area. On top of all that there is training available for the GLAM upload tool, helping you get to grips with mass uploads. The tool underpins some of the charity’s fantastic work, such as uploads from the National Library of Scotland (look, here’s a castle). Two dates are available, but if you’re interested and can make either session leave a note at the foot of the page. We hope to see you at our events in April, but most importantly of all enjoy editing!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
