First Question  What is a small condenser tumble dryer? That one got me but now that I have looked it up, it all makes sense, and pretty handy where space is an issue, or you do not have access to an outside wall for venting. A friend of mine would probably have been happy to learn about these before he bought his normal dryer, and now has a vent hose sneaking across his ceiling to exit on an outside wall. The silly things people do when they do not know. These dryers, as the name implies, tumbles the wet clothes, just like in a regular vented dryer, with one one big difference. Where a vented dryer kicks the water outside as water vapour, the condenser dryer directs the water vapour to a reservoir, where the water is condensed and stored in the reservoir until manually removed.  Types of Condenser Dryers You can learn something new every day. I did not know there were three types, but there are. We will forget for the moment that I did not even know what a small condenser tumble dryer is. The first type is what I would call the “normal” compact condenser tumble dryer. It does what a condenser dryer does, and cost wise, is slightly more expensive than an equivalent vented dryer. Operating costs are in the $75 – 100 range, depending on the size, which varies between being able to hold a 13 – 18 pound load (6 – 8 kg)   The second type condenses the water using a heat pump. These types are typically more expensive, but operating costs are much lower, running at about $50 per year.  A third type is a gas vented condenser dryer. The home handyman cannot install these, which is a drawback, and there does not appear to be any advantage when compared to a heat pump model, other than the purchase price may be slightly less. Add in the cost of installation, and there is likely no savings of going with a gas vented condenser dryer. End of the Tumble There you have it. My friend would wish he knew about the advantage these neat dryers before he bought his run of the mill vented dryer. He would be able to eliminate that unsightly hose running across his ceiling, and this presents the greatest benefit compared to a vented dryer. As well, one should look at the operating savings of a heat pump model, and the only drawback if you decide to purchase a small condenser tumble dryer is , get ready to have to manually remove the water on a regular basis. Albeit, a small inconvenience if my friend could get rid of his hose.  The post Benefits of Small Condenser Tumble Dryer appeared first on Carpinto.
