Hi. 2011 was the first year in many (since 2002?) that I didn't go to at least 8-10 concerts.  I'm not sure what happened.  It was a busy work year with a job change; some of my favorite bands play larger halls now, and we don't enjoy those shows as much anymore; we moved just far enough away from the Rock and Roll Hotel that shows I would've gone to because they were so close I now think twice about.  I also miss a lot of shows that occur on Friday nights; a few years ago I made an exception to my observance to see a show (two of our favorite bands, actually) and I enjoyed the show a lot less than I'd have expected because of it.  Possibly, seeing Wild Flag's terrific set at the Black Cat on March 11, arriving home late still wound up from the show, and watching twitter explode with Japanese friends' earthquake tweets as it all happened lowered my excitement for live music. Probably the most interesting aspect of listening to music in 2011 was, just like Ed notes for himself, streaming really worked for me for the first time with rdio.  I'm an unabashed fan; I love having the equivalent of what napster provided at its peak but in an affordable, convenient, and much more reliable service.  I've almost entirely stopped purchasing cds; the only time I will now is to pick up a rarity or perhaps a favorite recording direct from an artist at their shows.  My favorite rdio strategy is to find classic jazz recordings not yet in my collection by searching "Rudy Van Gelder".  Every single one I've found is a true classic, and I didn't own or even know several of them before rdio showed up.  It's also meant I've spent a lot more time with  older music from every era and less new music.  When a motif or harmony in a new song by someone you are just getting your head around reminds you of something from 30 years ago that you can look up with just a few tap tap taps it's easy to forget to go back to the new stuff. Anyway.  There were several new recordings in 2011 that I spent plenty of time with: my favorites, not in order: C'mon by Low Wild Flag David Comes to Life by Fucked Up The Deep Field by Joan as Police Woman w h o k i l l by tUnE-yArDs Other candidates that I just don't know well yet are the new St. Vincent, and Wye Oak, which I like so far, and... um... hold on, I have to look up this obscure 70s track M. and I can't remember the chorus for... no wait that's not it... oh you get the picture.
