Our Man In Abiko is publishing a book about people's experiences with the disastrous earthquake in Japan last week.  Here's mine: My Twitter app exploded with news of the earthquake when I was about to go to sleep late last Thursday night.  I studied Japanese in college, and was just in Tokyo a few months ago for a professional engagement.  I’m a librarian, and a software developer, and an avid Twitter user.  Having connected with Japanese professional colleagues on that recent trip, I’d also connected with many of them on Twitter.  Within minutes, it seemed like everybody I know using Twitter in Japan was tweeting — "not again", "it's still going", "this is a bad one" -- so I knew how serious it was.  Feeling helpless, I offered a simple「気をつけて」and watched the NHK web feed all night in horror like many other people. I can’t comprehend the horrible loss of life, culture, livelihoods, and infrastructure any more than anyone else.  As a librarian, though, I can turn aside from the tsunami videos and look at photos of spilled library shelves collected by Japanese librarians at http://togetter.com/li/110820 and it hits home, hard.  Like they explain on the “savelibrary” wiki (http://www45.atwiki.jp/savelibrary/, see also hashtag #jishinlib), saving lives comes first, but when reconstruction begins, libraries will be as crucial as ever, and libraries suffered great damage like everything else. At my job I work on a project at the Library of Congress to collect the archive of all public tweets donated by Twitter to the Library.  Later this year we hope to make access to this archive available to researchers.  Maybe it will be a valuable resource to someone studying terrible events like the earthquake and tsunami.  Long before that, though, librarians throughout Japan will be back to work serving their communities just like before, having gone through the same hardships as everyone else, and responding in the way they know best, by helping people to connect with information and with other people.  It’s a lot to ask when so many people have lost so much and face pressing needs for survival, but if you have the ability, please consider stopping by your local library to see if there’s anything you can do to help.
