Next week I'll be speaking at an event about metadata infrastructure on the topic of "Linking Library Data in the Web."  It's always best to lead with a demo so I'm hacking on Ed's linkypedia django application as a way to understand and explain what we're doing well and and we're not doing well in libraries to connect our data together.  My sense is that we're doing an amazing job of connecting our stuff together except for that "last mile" of the web, the humble link. Because most of what I learned about linked data on the web I learned through years of watching over Ed's shoulder (virtually and, more recently, actually), linkypedia seemed like a great place to explore this proposition.  It took longer than I expected to get my head around what linkypedia actually does - it's a bit of a mind hack.  linkypedia tells you which pages in wikipedia link to sites you care about.  You tell it about the site you care about (eg "my library's web site") and it crawls through wikipedia looking for links to your site.  It's a valuable addition to what your users and web usage logs and crawlers and bots might otherwise tell you about your site because it reflects, in a subjective yet tangible way, how others consider some aspect of your site to be instrumental in telling some distinct story from the one you're telling yourself. If you haven't tried linkypedia yet, go check out Ed's.  Click around a bit and you'll get the idea quickly. Because the way it tells you about how others value your site is by showing you how they're linking to it, it gives us another bit of useful information:  who else is doing something online that helps wikipedia tell a story I care about?  I set up a fork in github and added a screen that shows this directly:  This tells you that the Pablo Picasso wikipedia page links back out to the Modern, the Met, the National Gallery, and Yale's Gallery.  It also tells you that there's an LCCN for the authority record for Picasso.  This is all evident and nicely organized on the wikipedia page itself, for the most part, but seeing it extracted here gives me as a librarian a clear picture of some other things we could be doing in libraries. I hope to actually draw those pictures and post those soon. In the meantime linkypedia does a lot more than what I've described, and if you're the kind of person who would be reading this blog and still reading this post you'll probably want to take a closer look.  A good starting point is what Ed's written on his weblog about it.
