OpenEdition is proud to support the Canadian project PKP (Public Knowledge Project) and thereby contribute to the development of open source solutions for digital publishing. This partnership demonstrates the shared vision of OpenEdition and PKP to promote open access academic and scientific publishing by providing innovative and scalable professional solutions. OpenEdition’s digital publishing platforms, OpenEdition Books, Revues.org and Calenda, are run using Lodel, an online content management software (CMS) designed specifically for the digital publication of long and complex texts within a highly structured editorial environment. This solution has been adopted by 400 journals and 35 academic publishers. OpenEdition intends to strengthen and complement its provision of services in terms of editorial workflow thanks to the open source solutions developed by PKP: OJS (Open Journal Systems) and OMP (Open Monograph Press). Translated into 32 languages, OJS makes it easier for members of international editorial teams to collaborate. It allows academic journals to manage the different phases of editing a manuscript, while improving the organization and efficiency of the editorial process. Building on the success of OJS, PKP has continued to innovate, and in 2013 released the OMP software. Aimed at university presses and academic publishers, the software provides a clear and intuitive workflow for organizing all the different stages of submitting manuscripts and revising, editing and producing books. Key aspects of the partnership:  OpenEdition contributes to the evolution of features of PKP’s editorial workflow management solutions by participating in the OMP Early Adopters program.   OpenEdition contributes to the translation of interfaces and user documentation into French.  As a Bronze sponsor, OpenEdition provides financial support to PKP and becomes a member of its commission of partners. PKP The Public Knowledge Project is a collective of academics, librarians and technical experts that, since 1998, has been building free, open source software publishing platforms which provide an alternative to commercial and subscription-based routes to scholarly communication. Its various digital platforms provide a guided path through the editorial workflow of submission, review, editing, publishing and indexing. PKP is best known for developing and maintaining Open Journal Systems, Open Monograph Press and Open Conference Systems. The project’s goal from the outset was to find ways of increasing public and global access to research and scholarship. As such, it was an early participant in the open access movement that seeks to develop ways of creating peer-reviewed journals that do not charge readers for access to their content. PKP continues to be a major actor in the scholarly publishing community. OpenEdition OpenEdition (www.openedition.org) brings together four complementary publication and information platforms for the humanities and social sciences: OpenEdition Books (books series), Revues.org  (academic journals), Hypothèses (research blogs), Calenda (academic announcements). These four platforms constitute a complete infrastructure for academic communication. Since 2011 OpenEdition has proposed a commercial programme for open access content, OpenEdition Freemium, to libraries and university institutions. OpenEdition is developed by the Center for Open Electronic Publishing (Cléo), an initiative supported by the French Ministry of Research and four prestigious academic institutions: the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Aix-Marseille University (AMU), the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales (EHESS) and Avignon and Vaucluse University. In 2012, OpenEdition received the Label Equipex future investment award. OpenEdition has a longstanding policy to partner with and support open access and open source initiatives. To this end, OpenEdition is a member of OASPA (Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association), Sparc Europe (Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition) and CenterNet (an international network of digital humanities centers). It provides financial support to the DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals), Framasoft (a French network dedicating to promoting open software) and the AFUL (Association Francophone des Utilisateurs de Logiciels Libres). Read this post in French 
