With the month almost complete, I’m overdue for an update about what’s keeping me busy:  Drone Lab  Since attending Drone Games last fall, I’ve been crazy about personal drones and Nodecopter. I bit the bullet and bought a Parrot AR Drone, my friends have them, the School of Information bought one, and I’ve rallied a posse of fellow graduate students to participate a group directed study this semester that we’re calling Drone Lab. I was even called a ‘drone fiend’ on Twitter, based upon my enthusiasm.  The structure and idea of Drone Lab is simple: every Friday we meet to discuss and program AR Drones, some of us simply hacking while others working on more-ambitious projects. So far the development has ranged in complexity from programming basic flight patterns, to exploring computer vision, hooking up an arduino in hopes of attaching additional sensors, and ultimately I think our collective goal is to deliver a taco (see Tacocopter). Random people have even started showing up to check it out, interested in learning how to program the drones – it’s pretty amazing.  I think Drone Lab has been a great and informal way for a group of us to work together, creating a local community of hackers. I’m not sure if this will remain a small group, or turn into something more open and large, but I’m having a great time. We have a shared repo of drone scripts on GitHub if you’re interested in checking out some of the code we’re experimenting with.  Harlem Shake (Drone Edition)  With the help of Arthur Che and Gilbert Hernandez, I directed a Harlem Shake at the UC Berkeley School of Information, featuring an AR Drone! I know the meme is dead, but it’s worth checking out for lols.     Mozilla Open Badges  I’m sprinting with the rest of the Open Badges team as we approach our Mid-March 1.0 release. Working as an Integration Engineer, I’m helping partners and community developers become Open Badges-compliant while also contributing code including Facebook integration with an upcoming release of the Mozilla backpack, and merging some large community contributions for a future version of WPBadger. It’s awesome. The badges team is wildly talented, and it feels like the community has momentum as we work toward hitting 1.0.  GitHub for Collaborative Writing  As part of my Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) course, my team is researching and prototyping a tool that uses GitHub as a backend for collaborative writing. We’ll be looking at a variety of domains: academic writing, journalism, business materials, and technical documentation in order to identify overlapping needs and features that we could integrate into our tool. Some social and community features of GitHub like issues, comments, and forking will likely be integrated into our tool in addition to the distributed version control features of git. My contribution will be a technical evaluation of GitHub’s API, and contributing to our prototype.  When explaining the implications of this project, I’ve pointed people to one of the slickest tools I’ve recently seen, called Huboard. Huboard is a Kanban-style project management tool that allows you to organize GitHub tickets at various stages of development, and creates a radically different workflow for how you normally interact with tickets. And while the details of the prototype we’re developing for CMC are still up in the air, I hope that whatever we come up with is similarly simplistic in its approach, making use of GitHub to provide a lightweight visual and organizational layer. GitHub is a tremendously powerful platform, and finding non-code uses for it will be great.  Drinkly    Last but not least, Michael Hintze and I have been busy working together on our final masters project, called Drinkly. This project is solidly in the ‘fun’ category, with the purpose of making it easy to find happy hour specials at nearby bars. Drinkly is the latest of a number of projects we’ve worked on related to the chicken and egg problems of incentivising businesses to share information with consumers in a dedicated channel. We’ve received some positive feedback so far. More details on that next month. 
