Michael Hintze and I recently met up with Peter Merholtz to discuss our I School final masters project. With three months until graduation, we were seeking advice on product development and the decisions we’ll need to make.  One of the strategies Peter suggested was to focus around a set of design principles, referring us to a blog post by Luke Wroblewski. This has helped organize our project early on, and spurred a series of related thoughts I felt were worth writing down and sharing.  In his blog post about Design Principles at Microsoft, Luke cites his own definition of design principles:  Design principles are the guiding light for any software application. They define and communicate the key characteristics of the product to a wide variety of stakeholders including clients, colleagues, and team members. Design principles articulate the fundamental goals that all decisions can be measured against and thereby keep the pieces of a project moving toward an integrated whole.  This definition captures several important things. First of all, the audience of design principles can be diverse, simultaneously resonating with programmers, designers, project managers, and sponsors. Particularly on large teams, communication breakdowns between team members can fragment a project and sometimes force revisions to work that has already been done. Additionally, principles can help teams make better decisions.  Peter’s suggestion was to write the principles on paper and hang them from the walls of the workplace. When making a design decision, does it align with the principles? Principles can become a filter through which team decisions are made.  Principles for our project  Here’s a sampling of the design principles Michael and I identified for our final project:  Delight and surprise. The smallest details matter for a great experience. Use well placed animations when you can. Notify users sparingly. Notifications are disruptive. Only bother users when the alert is meaningful and significant. Have fun when you can. A beer mug filling up is more fun than a spinning circle, or beach ball of death. Keep it simple. People love brevity. Keep things short and meaningful. Get to know the user. Learn about our users over time. Don’t make them input the same thing over and over These principles capture our user experience goals, and begin to define the personality of the project itself. Simplicity, delight and surprise, and having fun clarify both what the project is, as well as what it is not. I’ll update this post later in the semester to measure their effectiveness.  Luke’s blog post shares examples of principles that have persisted through product development at Microsoft, including Windows 7 and the Microsoft Surface. There’s some interesting crossover between their principles and ours, but also some divergence – I think it’s important to not be dogmatic about the use and definition principles, but to think of them as a management tool. No two projects will have the same principles, nor the same quantity or granularity.  Design principles in an agile process  Principles create an artifact that persists across the development cycle for a product, sometimes in the absence of a predefined plan and before a working version of software has been delivered. In an agile development model, decisions are made throughout the life of a project, instead of up front as they would be in a waterfall process. After all, the Manifesto for Agile Software Development itself is organized around a series of principles. Principles offer flexibility to make decisions later, while keeping them focused on a larger goals.  They can also establish an understanding among stakeholders about the experience of a product, which sometimes is difficult to grasp until a prototype exists. There are obviously examples of when this is less crucial – strong corporate or team cultures are other ways to focus the passion and ideas of employees, establishing consensus regarding style and qualities of a work. But the reality of many teams is one where not everyone is centrally located, possibly involving differing stakeholders including contractors, content partners, and sponsors. Principles can provide cohesiveness and certainty to what otherwise may seem distributed and chaotic.  Principle ALL THE THINGS!  Lastly, principles can be applied more broadly than to a single project, and instead to a larger body of work. One of the inspiring talks I watched last year was given by Bret Victor, Inventing on Principle. Bret asked us to define what the guiding principle of our individual work is, and I spent a lot of time trying to define my own guiding principle as a result. I’ve come to decide that I lack a single principle, although I admire Bret’s focus. I could name half a dozen that guide me, but not a only one. That is fine. The purpose of principles is simply to help you focus, provide something to look back at in the future to evaluate your progress, and offer a way to clearly communicate your purpose to others.  I’d love to discuss how principles are used in other ways than I’ve described in this blog post. Please let me know what you think. 
