I wrapped up the Fall semester with a few new projects. Here are the highlights:  Coffee On Me  Originally hacked together for the Information Design Hackathon in late October, coffeeon.me is a recommendation service to meet professionals outside your network. I’m an avid coffee drinker and often end up networking with other professionals over a cup; hopefully a service like Coffee on Me can make the discovery and invitation process easier and more enjoyable.    We are currently accepting signups for the service and have a working version of our recommendation algorithm, but the service is still in private testing. My role in the project was backend dev, and team includes Michael Hintze, Rui Dai, and Aijia Yan. If you’re interested in the service, drop me a line and let’s grab coffee, on me.  Triggers  Triggers is the first step toward building the mobile application of my dreams; a web application that makes it simple to create triggers based upon my location, time, and other data to notify me of things that I otherwise would have forgotten or not been aware of. Some friends have referred to the idea as a mobile IFTTT. As the final project for my database management class, Triggers was meant to primarily showcase MySQL5 triggers executing customized and repeatable queries that a user generates using web mobile forms. As new data is added to the system, these queries are run, and when they are true a notification is sent to the user.  What would it be used for? There are a variety of uses for parameterized and custom queries that guided my project, ranging from something as basic as an alarm clock notification that goes off at a specified time, to a notification that reminds me the next time I’m within a certain proximity of a location, to a notification reading data from the National Weather Service that alerts me when it’s going to rain tomorrow so that I’ll remember to carry an umbrella.  I also used this project as an excuse to writing the web application in NodeJS, and it ended up becoming the largest Node app that I’ve ever built from scratch. It needs some refactoring before I officially release the codebase, but I hope to share it on Github over winter break.  InStore    I spent a ton of time this semester researching the mobile coupon space, both for the Designing Mobile Experiences class I took, as well as Startup Lab course where we planned and pitched startup ideas. My mobile team, including Aijia Yan, Michael Hintze, and Gaurav Shetti, prototyped a mobile application called InStore for the discovery and redemption of coupons, deals, and events for retail stores. A prototype is online, as well as our assignments that outline some of our research, presentation, and competitive analysis are online to check out.  In the end, we focused on two scenarios when designing our prototype:  A user visits a local shopping district, and opens the app to locate deals at nearby stores. They choose a particular store and redeem a deal. A user opens app to find deals that their close friends have recently claimed using the app, and redeems a coupon that they find. Mobile coupons and deals are in a huge and quickly changing space, and one of the takeaways I had from the InStore project was that our scope and ambition for the app was too broad which made it difficult to design and refine throughout the semester. We also began to identify some mistakes that a lot of applications are making, which will be useful down the line. Michael and I plan to take lessons learned from this semester’s work on InStore as we work on our final masters project which will be in a related space. 
