I’ve made it a priority to work on more group projects this semester, and not surprised that I’m having fun and learning a lot. Here’s a sampling of what I’ve been up to:  Who Is Who    Who Is Who is a web app to learn the names and faces of current students at the UC Berkeley School of Information. When loading the page, three student headshots are randomly displayed with the question: “who is _______?” This little web app was hacked together in a few hours, and gave me an excuse to try out Python’s Flask microframework. I was pleasantly surprised to see another I School student fork the project.  Github: https://github.com/davelester/ischool-whoswho  UC Berkeley Scavenger Hunt    The UC Berkeley Scavenger Hunt was a group project with Michael Hintze and Kate Rushton as part of our Information Organization Lab. After rereading Vannevar Bush’s Memex paper in class, we were assigned a fairly open-ended project: develop a web application that uses the Delicious API, and organize the data around trails and steps within trails. Most groups in class used this prompt to pursue projects around organizing web bookmarks, but we took the trail metaphor more literally and created a scavenger hunt that is powered by Delicious.  The web application is a scavenger hunt, meant to be played using smartphones. Groups are shown a set of hints of locations around campus, and when they reach that physical location they can “check in”. The application uses HTML5 geolocation to pinpoint a user, and if a group is successfully within a specified distance to their location, they can move onto the next hint. This project was also the first time I played with HTML5’s localStorage, which we used to save some basic session and group info. We had to use some hacks in how we saved data with Delicious in order to satisfy the assignment, but overall it was a fun project.  Github: https://github.com/davelester/delicious-trailhunter  Grad Badge  Last month I had the awesome opportunity to spend a day at Facebook in Menlo Park for the Gates Foundation hackathon, where we were developing Facebook applications for college students. My team included Sunny Lee from Mozilla, Lia Siebert from Sheepdog Sciences, Charles Wright from the Gates Foundation, and Catalina Ruiz-Healy from Grad Guru. The hackathon itself was limited in terms of the time to write code, so we scoped our effort around a prototype and focused on the pitch we gave to judges in the afternoon.  Grad Guru is a mobile application that acts as a community college advisor in students’ pockets, and using Catalina’s own experiences developing apps for Community College students we prototyped an app called Grad Badge that managed the deadlines a high school student would have to apply to community college, using the Facebook Open Graph to push badges and notifications to friends. The event itself was a kickoff for the College Knowledge Challenge, a $2.5 million fund to develop Facebook apps that will help students apply to, attend, and stay in college.  Spotifont  I’m now working in a new group for IOLab that is creating an alternate way to navigate and discover free fonts in Google’s Font Directory. We jokingly began to refer to it as “Spotify for Fonts”, so the name “Spotifont” has stuck. The solution we’re pursuing is a mix of a controlled vocabulary to describe fonts (like Serif, San-Serif, Handwritten, etc) with user-generated tags (like Cool, Headline, Clean, Oldtimey) to make the font discovery process more personalized.  Github: https://github.com/davelester/spotifont 
