Hierarchy has a bad rap. Hierarchy is a one-sided relation, one thing set higher than another. In society, hierarchy is the stage for abuse of power. The rich on the poor, white on black, men on women, straight on gay. In language too, hierarchy is problematic. Static labels are laden with power and stereotypes, favoring some over others.Â Aggressive language, too, can overshadow small worthy ideas. I read LilaÂ the year it was published, 1991. I have a special fondness for this book because my girlfriend bought it for me; she is now my wife. Lila is not a romantic book, and I don’t mean in the classic-romantic senseÂ of Pirsig’s first famous book. I re-read Lila this year. Philosophy aside, I cringe at Pirsig’s portrayal of his central female character, Lila. She is a stereotype, a dumb blonde, operating only on the level of biology and sexuality, the subject of men’s debates about quality. Pirsig is more philosopher than storyteller. We cannot escape that many of the good things we love about language are essentially hierarchical. Narrative is linear: a beginning, middle, and end.Â Order shapes the story. Hierarchy gives a bird’s eye view, a table of contents, a summary that allows a reader to consider a work as a whole. For the reader’s evaluation of a book, or for choosing to only enter a work at a particular door, the table provides a map. HierarchyÂ is a tree, a trunk on which the reader can climb, and branches on which the reader can swing. Granted, a hierarchy is just one view, an author’s take on how the work should be understood. There is merit in deconstructing the author’s take and analyzing the work in other ways.Â It is static hierarchy that is the problem. Many writers are inspired to start a project with a vision of the whole, a view of how all the pieces hang together, as if only keystrokes were needed to fill in the details.Â The writer gets busy, happily tossing content into categories. Inevitably new material is acquired and new thinking takes place. Sooner or later a crisis occurs — the new ideas do not fit the original view.Â Either the writer does the necessary work to uproot the original categories and build a new better view, or the work will flounder. Again, it is static hierarchy that is the problem. We must find ways to tear down hierarchy almost as quickly as we build it up. Pirsig’s metaphysics is all about the tension between static and dynamic quality. My writing technology, Lila, named after Pirsig’s book, uses word qualities to compute hierarchy. What word qualities measure hierarchy? I have several ideas. I propose that passages with abstract words are higher order than those with more concrete words. Closer to Pirsig’s view, passages that are dynamic — measured by agency, activity, and heat — are higher order than those that are static. Or does cool clear static logic trump heated emotion? There are several ways to measure it, and plenty of issues to work out. It will take more posts.
