Cindy Cohn, Legal Director and General Counsel for the EFF. Photographed by Erich Valo. For decades, the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) and the American Library Association (ALA) have stood shoulder to shoulder on the front lines of the fight for privacy online, at the library and in many other spheres of our daily lives. EFF Executive Director Cindy Cohn will discuss that proud shared history and the uncertain future of personal privacy during this year’s 2015 ALA Annual Conference in San Francisco. The session, titled “Frenetic, Fraught and Front Page: An Up-to-the-Second Update from the Front Lines of Libraries’ Fight in Washington,” takes place from 8:30 to 10:00 a.m. on Saturday, June 27, 2015, at the Moscone Convention Center in room 2001 of the West building. Before becoming EFF’s Executive Director in April of 2015, Cohn previously served as the award-winning group’s legal director and general counsel from 2000–2015. In 2013, National Law Journal named Cohn one of the 100 most influential lawyers in America, noting: “If Big Brother is watching, he better look out for Cindy Cohn.” In 2012, the Northern California Chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists awarded her the James Madison Freedom of Information Award. During the conference session, Adam Eisgrau, managing director of the ALA Office of Government Relations, will provide an up-to-the-minute insight from the congressional trenches of key federal privacy legislation “in play,” including the current status of efforts to reform the USA PATRIOT Act, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), as well as copyright reform, net neutrality and federal library funding. Participants will have the opportunity to pose questions to the speakers. Speakers Cindy Cohn, executive director, Electronic Frontier Foundation Adam Eisgrau, managing director, Office of Government Relations, American Library Association View all ALA Washington Office conference sessions The post EFF chief to keynote Washington Update session at Annual Conference appeared first on District Dispatch.
