One of the great productivity mysteries has to be why so many of us put off unpacking a suitcase after a trip. This is the stuff of sitcoms, of advice columns, and blog posts. And of real life: I’ll be the first to admit that I sometimes leave my bag halfway unpacked for several days after a trip, even though it makes me feel somewhere between irritated and nauseous to see it sitting in the middle of the room. So why is it so hard to unpack a suitcase? The primary reasons are: Fatigue: If you arrive home late at night, or after a long series of planes, trains, and automobiles, the last thing you feel like doing is something that feels like a chore. A lack of urgency: Most people who procrastinate unpacking after a trip don’t leave the whole bag zipped. They pull out the absolutely necessary items: prescription medicine, eyeglasses, and so forth. But as long as you have additional clothes hanging in your closet at home, the urgency for unpacking the ones in your suitcase tends to dissipate. A desire to re-enter normal life: I think a lot of the resistance to unpacking comes from the desire to hurry up and start back into your regular routines. Unpacking is a chore that reminds you that you’re making a transition. And you can quickly become accustomed to seeing a suitcase sitting in the corner of the room and forget that it’s even there. Solving the Problem Here are some strategies that make it easier to get that suitcase unpacked quickly: Tackle it right away: This is the most important thing you can do to make unpacking easier. For me, if I don’t get my bag unpacked within the first 45 minutes or so, it’ll just sit there for a couple of days. If you have a laundry area in your house, try taking your suitcase there right when you walk in the door to directly transfer dirty clothes to the laundry hamper. (Obviously, if you you’re concerned you might have picked up bedbugs on your travels, you’ll want to quarantine your suitcase and its contents, preferably outside your living space on a balcony or in a garage.) Create an obstacle with your suitcase or its contents: Lifehacker recommends putting your things on your bed so that you have to deal with them before going to sleep. Or if you leave items in the suitcase, at least leave it in the middle of the room, not in a corner where it can be easily ignored. Pack and unpack by category: If you pack your bag with clothes, shoes, sports equipment, electronics, and toiletries separated from each other, it makes it easier to unpack those catgories of items quickly. Keep some things pre-packed: If you travel frequently, storing toiletries or other small items in zippered cases makes it easy to unpack the suitcase and inventory what you need to replace. What are your favorite tips for unpacking a suitcase after a long trip? Let us know in the comments! [Creative Commons licensed photo by flickr user Tom Godber]
