[Slide 1]: Hi, so this is a really brief historical presentation that’s designed to do two things: 1) explore the temporality of material technology, and 2) brainstorm about possible ways this kind of work can interface with literary study. The second part I haven’t quite figured out yet. [Slide 2]:Â There are several ways, I think, that Media Archaeology can complicate literary history, but the one I’m working with today is the notion of a layered form of temporality. Here’s a fascinating quote by Shannon Mattern, who’s working with urban infrastructure. But I think this notion of a palimpsest temporality can be applied to other kinds of technologies as well. What’s interesting to me is this notion of a stratified materiality, that technologies don’t simply supercede one another but are superimposed upon one another. [Slide 3]:Â The circuitboard is fascinating in this regard because it comes from so many different experiments and technological parts. Here, you see two separate descriptions of the “boarding” of different circuits — the first by Albert Hanson in 1903 (and note the interweaving pattern). Of course, textiles were never far from computer programming. One of the first programmable technologies was the Jacquard loom, which used punchcards to create different weaving patterns. And Craig Carey will talk about sewing patterns as software in his presentation. Towards the bottom is Edison’s improvement on Hanson’s design, with the addition of a polymer adhesive. Really, Edison and Hanson developed the idea that circuits could be “printed” or put onto a flat polymer surface and work together. Both patents from Edison and Hanson also mention the possibility of a conducive ink, which is now used in several forms of circuitboards and maker culture projects to create — for instance — circuits that can be drawn. See circuit scribe. [Slide 4]:Â One of the things that you quickly realize when you study the history of science is this phenomenon where two people seemingly invent the same thing simultaneously. I think this misunderstands the nature of technological development, which may depend upon layered, recursive and material temporalities as much as the interaction of human social organizations and individuals to occur. If we split the layers of the printed circuits described by Hanson and Edison further, we’ll find the huge obsession with the dynamo in the nineteenth century. These are two of the earliest versions. The first, by Michael Faraday (who also invented the Faraday cage) was an electromagnetic disk that generated current and arced back to the disk. The second was a version of Faraday’s design that was the first “true” dynamo, in that it could actually use copper wiring to send the charge somewhere else. [Slide 5]:Â When we talk about the circuitboard, then, it quickly delves into a material version of Derrida’s differance: a situation where the components of one technology have components that open to further components — seemingly without end. Edison’s board is a miniature version of the dynamo, which depended upon electromagnetic experiments by Faraday and Hans Christian Orsted — the latter of which was the first to observe electric current operating with magnetic fields. You can also see the process of layered accumulation occurringÂ materially by other inventions. Bangali inventor Sir Jagadesh Chandra Bose was the first person to create a workable semi-conductor that could be used — in his case — to detect radio waves. Integrated circuits, a set of circuits printed on semi-conducting material, weren’t introduced until 1952 and the microprocessor didn’t emerge until 1969. [Slide 6]: This brings me to a set of questions that I hope we can investigate further during this panel. First, this notion of the black box technology. If media archaeology asks us to uncover the layers of object temporality, is there an end to the black box phenomenon (i.e. the idea that there’s an object whose inner workings one does not know?); Second and third: how might the different kinds of temporality presented by media archaeology complicate the notion of literary periodicity in fields like material culture or history of the book? In other words, what does it mean to think not of the long 19th century, but perhaps the deep 19th century? Thanks!
