First, if you haven’t already, meet Emily Dog. In addition to the stuff I wrote here on my own blog, I published a hodgepodge of stuff elsewhere in various media in 2014. I’m gathering much of it here. I started doing this in 2012 and then again in 2013, mostly as a way for me to keep track of what I’m up to. But it’s also turned into a way to introduce people to some of my favorite places to hang out on the web (and to the amazing collaborators I’ve worked with over the year).Keep Learning1. The rest of this list is in no particular order, but if I had to pick a favorite of all the stuff I wrote this year, it would be this: The Pedagogies of Reading and Not Reading2. Collaboration — Learning Collectively (w/ Sean Michael Morris)3. Tools for Collaborative Writing (w/ Sean Michael Morris)4. E-mail Pedagogy and the Cascade Effect5. What is Good Writing?: A Meditation on Breaking Rules and Grammar Pedagogy6. Is It Okay to be a Luddite? (w/ Sean Michael Morris)PhD2Published7. Hackademic Guide to Networking (w/ Charlotte Frost)HASTAC8. Technologies of Meta-Learning, Trust, and Power: Interview with Jesse Stommel9. MOOC MOOC: Dark Underbelly; or, How a Cave Troll Can Help Revise the Syllabus of EducationStorify10. The Adventures of MLA Dog (w/ Mary the Dog, my favorite collaborator of all)In Print Books11. “Monsters that Matter: Things that Rise in the Contemporary Zombie Film” in Unnatural Reproductions and Monstrosity: The Birth of the Monster in Literature, Film, and Media12. “A Kaleidoscope of Variables: The Complex Nature of Online Education in Composition Classes” in Critical Examinations of Distance Education Transformation across Disciplines (w/ Chris Friend and Sean Michael Morris)13. “The Course as Container: Distributed Learning and the MOOC” in Global Innovation of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education: Transgressing Boundaries (w/ Sean Michael Morris)Hybrid Pedagogy14. Critical Digital Pedagogy: a Definition15. If Freire Made a MOOC: Open Education as Resistance (w/ Sean Michael Morris)16. Hybrid Pedagogy, Digital Humanities, and the Future of Academic Publishing (w/ Sean Michael Morris)17. Toward an Interactive Criticism: House of Leaves as Haptic Interface18. One of my favorite things I wrote wasn’t actually an article at all, but one of the prompts for MOOC MOOC: Dark Underbelly, a course-like thing I co-taught at the start of the year. I wrote several prompts for the six-week MOOC, but one in particular has stuck with me: MMDU: “I Would Prefer Not To.”SlideshareI’ve never been a fan of slides (aside from showing a film still here and there), but this year, I decided to get my head under the hood of the form, so I made 12 sets, all of which I published openly to the web. Here’s a few which I used for keynotes in Manchester and Colorado, a workshop in Singapore, and talks in Switzerland, Wisconsin, and D.C.:19. Rewriting the Syllabus: Examining New Hybrid and Online Pedagogies20. Zombie Pedagogies Embodied Learning in the Digital Age21. Digital Pedagogy is about Breaking Stuff: Toward a Critical Digital Humanities Pedagogy22. 12 Steps for Designing an Assignment with Emergent Outcomes23. New-form Scholarship and the Public Digital Humanities24. If Freire Made a MOOC: Open Education and Critical Digital Pedagogy (w/ Sean Michael Morris)    If Freire Made a MOOC: Open Education and Critical Digital Pedagogy  from Jesse Stommel Wisconsin Public Radio:25. University of the Air: Don't Dismiss Those Tweets as FrivolousWisconsin Public Television26. University Place: Horror Film and the BodyI made a video for the Higher Education Academy #teachDH Summit27. The Decay of the Digital HumanMLA28. Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and Experiments: I am contributing to this project being published by the Modern Language Association, curating materials related to the keyword “Hybrid.” The book will be reviewed publicly over the next year and released in 2016.I also tweeted some stuffAnyone with a policy about laptop use in class should also consider having a policy about pencil use.— Jesse Stommel (@Jessifer) August 13, 2014 Dear @ProQuest, what would a person need to do to get their dissertation removed from @amazon? Also, who's collecting profits on those?— Jesse Stommel (@Jessifer) November 9, 2014 Dear @proquest, I don't want my dissertation in the @turnitin database. Make this about agency in what happens to our work, not profit.— Jesse Stommel (@Jessifer) November 9, 2014 If #tenure is designed to support #academicfreedom, we should not be asked to compromise academic freedom in order to get tenure.— Jesse Stommel (@Jessifer) August 27, 2014 Last but definitely not least a couple favorites that I had the pleasure of editing/reviewing this year:The Political Power of Play by Adeline KohLove in the Time of Peer Review by a Bunch of Amazing PeopleRisk, Reward, Digital Writing by Sean Michael Morris2015 and BeyondI have a motley crew of projects planned for 2015, including two MOOCs, which are almost polar opposites of one another: a platformless cMOOC and what I’m calling a flipped xMOOC, for which I’m making a feature-length documentary film:MOOC MOOC: Critical PedagogyShakespeare in Community
