In June 2013, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation awarded NISO a grant to undertake a two-phase initiative to explore, identify, and advance standards and/or best practices related to a new suite of potential metrics in the community. This initiative was a direct outgrowth of a breakout discussion group during the altmetrics 12 meeting in Chicago, IL. This project is an important step in the development and adoption of new assessment metrics, which include usage-based metrics, social media references, and network behavioral analysis. In addition, this project will explore potential assessment criteria for non-traditional research outputs, such as data sets, visualizations, software, and other applications. After the first phase, which will expose areas for potential standardization, the community will collectively prioritize those potential projects. The second phase will be to advance and develop those standards/best practices prioritized by the community and approved by the membershipNISO will host the second of three meetings meant to further engage the community in this project. The second in-person meeting in support of this work will take place on Wednesday, December 11, 2013 from 8:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. (ET) at the Capitol Hilton, Federal Room A, in Washington, DC. This meeting is made possible by the generous support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the objectives of this one-day meeting will include a short opening keynote on the topic of assessment, lightning talks on related projects, brainstorming for identification of topics for discussion, and prioritizing proposed work items.**The meeting is free for all attendees, but room capacity is limited. Please RSVP here, which will assist in planning and logistics.**[snip]FREE LIVESTREAM AVAILABLE: For those interested in this work, but unable to attend in-person, NISO will be live streaming this event. Credentials for login will be provided closer to the event date; please make sure to designate your attendance as "virtual" in the RSVP form so that we may be sure to communicate that information to you.Source and Links Available At:[http://www.niso.org/topics/tl/altmetrics_initiative/]
