The Pacific Northwestern city offers a range of reads, from jazz era tales to bleak portrayals of modern American life. Here are some of our readers’ favouritesJon Raymond introduces the literature of PortlandThe “idea” of Portland only entered the popular imagination in recent years, chiefly thanks to the comedy TV show Portlandia, as Jon Raymond wrote recently. But this city, known as a haven for vegans, iced latte lovers (yes, flat white fever hasn’t conquered America – yet), beards, fixed-gear bike worshippers and any other hipster stereotype you want to invoke, is more interesting and surprising than this suggests.Whether you’re planning a trip to this Pacific Northwest city or you want to find out more about it through its literature, you’re in for a treat, thanks to a collective brainstorming we did with our readers. Here are the top picks. Is your favourite missing? Do add it in the comments.“It is love, in all-American, over-salted, extra-large portions, that makes The Free original and compelling. [...] Freddie and particularly Pauline waddle triumphantly out of their heaps of shopping and stacks of bills as convincing, heroic people, and provide ample shoulders over which to peek at Vlautin’s blasted vision of the US.”I drifted and I drifted, ended up in Wyoming/I got so broke I sold my car.Look, here’s a piece of advice. What you do is you think about the life you want, you think about it in your head. Make it a place where you want to be: a ranch, a beach house, a penthouse on the top of a skyscraper. It doesn’t matter what it is, but a place that you can hide in. When things get rough, go there. – from The Motel LifeFugitives And Refugees is that most quaint of things, a travel book - but it’s not quite the book his publishers hoped for. Instead, it is a series of essays, postcards and ruminations on the underbelly of his home town, Portland. Yet beneath the profanities and the glitz of his new book [...] there is a calm, spiritual Palahniuk fighting to get out. This side also struggles out in conversation, sometimes in the most unexpected of ways.Katherine’s theory is that everyone looking to make a new life migrates west, across America to the Pacific Ocean. Once there, the cheapest city they can live in is Portland. This gives us the most cracked of crackpots. The misfits among misfits. ‘We just accumulate more and more strange people’ she says. ‘All we are are the fugitives and refugees.’Action central was Williams Avenue, an entertainment strip lined with hot spots where you could find jazz twenty-four hours a day. What is now the Rose Quarter used to have a lot of other names. Any cabby worth his fare would have known that Black Broadway, the other side, colored town, all meant the same thing: the Avenue, namely Williams Avenue. Fifty years ago you could stand in the middle of the Avenue (where the Blazers play basketball today) and look up Williams past the chilli parlors, past the barbecue joints, the beauty salons, all the way to Broadway, and see hundreds of people dressed up as if they were going to a fashion show. It could be four in the morning. It didn’t matter; this was one of those ‘streets that never sleep’.Mala Noche, also one of Van Sant’s first films, captures well 1970s Portland, before Skid Row residents were evicted and the area was turned into “The Pearl” and homeless shelters and cheap hotels became stores selling expensive junk. As a native of Jerusalem and a resident of Portland for many years (with stays in London, Eugene, Davis and Berkeley) there is much to recommend the city, the mountains, trees, and many progressive minded people. I don’t want to interfere with their lives. A gringo like me has an easy life. A privileged life. And just because I see someone attractive like Johnny it doesn’t mean I should be able to have him, to buy him or whatever, just because he’s hungry and on the street. Desperate, good-looking. That wasn’t my intention exactly, but it could be misunderstood that way.A woman made of parts is a dangerous thing. You never know when she’ll throw away a piece you may need.Math can explain the reason there’s one out of four chance that I’d have blue eyes. But it doesn’t explain why me.Fantastic books for older kids (my daughter is 12 and we read them aloud). Wildwood is a magical land across the river from Portland that seems stuck in the late 19th century, with some extra magic thrown in. On one level, Meloy is writing a gentle satire of beardy hipsters. But on most levels, Wildwood is a great adventure story featuring cool kids saving the world.My dear Prue, we are the inheritors of a wonderful world, a beautiful world, full of life and mystery, goodness and pain. But likewise are we the children of an indifferent universe. We break our own hearts imposing our moral order on what is, by nature, a wide web of chaos. It is a hopeless task.That attitude of smugness held sway in Portland for several generations, keeping the place hidebound and insular. Consequently, Portland was largely unprepared for the influx of population.Nobody has any rights unless they’ve got a machine gun. Continue reading...
