and because I have no more cancer treatments to count down.  Sure, there’s weeks of recovery and years of follow-up, but the acute phase of treatment is officially over and I am a happy camper. What I am doing to celebrate: 1.  Completed and will mail out our application for Canadian citizenship. 2.  Long nap. 3.  Dinner and music with friends. 4.  More socializing and napping over the weekend. 5.  I am taking a leap of faith that I will be in good enough shape to go to Brazil in 5 weeks’ time, so we started looking into visa requirements. In the end, EBR was kind of anticlimatic.  I certainly experienced nothing approaching what other patients referred to as the “worst pain of their lives” although if I swallow the wrong thing or the wrong way, it does hurt like hell.  The burn on my neck is also plenty unpleasant, but it’s just that.  I take mostly over the counter medicines, and just one spoonful of codeine cough syrup at night to control a really nasty cough.  How bad can that be?  I also appear to have all my taste.  Which is amazing.  Either I got lucky or they really did aim “away” from my mouth and throat. Recovery will be slow.  In fact, for the first couple weeks I may not recover at all as the radiation continues to do its work.  But at least I won’t have a 150 minute hole in the middle of every weekday.  The burn may let up in about 3 weeks, but I will need to put heavy sunscreen on it forever, and I need to stay out of chlorinated pools for a good month.  So I will still be rocking the dorky Tilly hat until the burn is healed enough to use sunscreen.  The swallowing pain may stay with me for 6 weeks or more, though I expect that it will decrease slowly, just as it ramped up slowly.  As to the fatigue, who knows?  My guess is I will feel waves of it for a very long time, as I just got through about 9 months of intensive treatment including 2 kinds of radiation and 3 surgeries.  But I’m hopeful that it too will start to remit in a few weeks and that I can get back to being me, at least most of the time. Luckily, I have a very non-stressful year to look forward to. As to the future of this blog, there will still be cancer blogging, as I left a few aspects of the year undocumented and would like to tidy that up while it is fresh in my mind.  Though I certainly will feel empowered to address other topics, or take a summer break as I did last year.  We shall see.
