Academia is a funny place. Today I received an email from the University Chancellor asking all staff to try be quicker in answering emails. The email politely asked members of staff to “try answer after 48/72 hours” and not let emailsÂ goÂ unread for more than 3 months (3months?!). The funny thing is that those people who live on and with phones and laptops doing research, do haveÂ emails accountsÂ open. A little more than a month ago I sent an email to a senior professor who had a specific interest after I was asked about a very very specific company. Well, although this person sent group emails 10 seconds after receiving mine, and cc’ed me in other emails on completely different matters, I am still to receiveÂ a reply. In corporate, 24 hours is Ok, 5 minutes is best, depending on client and account. In academia there is a rather weird way of reminding people aboutÂ “busy-ness”. “I m too busy doing other stuff”; “I have a mental order I have got to follow”, or worse, “I was doing research”. Find it funny when after 3 weeks orÂ -extreme cases-Â 1 full month you receive a reply “I am so sorry , i was busy”; at least acknowledge receipt?! It is a rather interesting sociological thought. Does the lack of email interaction lead to think that most of the professors/doctors and (now) even PhD students do not read emails but, somehow and in an unknown way, they write them not realising there is an “inbox” part of their email accountsÂ where new email (which can contain replies to their own sent emails) might be allocated, stored and -most importantly- read? Or, idea had for some time, do they want to actually highlight, underline, remind you writer that there is a hierarchy of replies: VIPs, rest of the world (don t want to know where students sit in all this). The one I find funny is the replies from PhDs. Two,Â three, four weeks after you sent them an email (any email) Â u get an “I m so sorry, I was doing research, I m so bad with emails!”. If it came from a student of philosophy of the arts that has no knowledge of digital technologies and refuses them in a rather Marxian fashion, I take it, understand it and actually envy it. When the student is a futureÂ scholar Â of digital humanities or computer scienceÂ it becomes amusing. Especially when you have them on your Twitter and Instagram and you actually see the “research” they are undertaking.Â The best is, “Hello….blablabla… I will respond to you when I go back to work in January”…this is the funniest one. However, it is an interesting sociological observation and perhaps, with seniority, I may see the changes; for the time being I enjoy the lack of consideration that is very peculiar to academia. Very, indeed. Hoping one day they’ll realise that public and private funds along with fees also mean having consideration for email writers. 
