8th Annual Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science DePaul University, Chicago IL  December 5-7, 2013  CALL FOR PAPERS The 8th Annual Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science will take place December 5-7, 2013, on the Lincoln Park Campus of DePaul University. The conference will consist of a plenary address by a significant Digital Humanist, as well as panels, roundtables, or other kinds of sessions proposed by scholars relating to recent issues and advances in the digital humanities. Interested scholars are invited to present proposals for individual papers, entire panels or roundtable sessions by September 27, 2013. Panels will consist of three papers and a commentator/moderator, although other formats are possible. Panel proposals should include a title and brief description of the session as a whole (300 words or less), along with paper titles and abstracts (300 words or less) of all panelists. Short-form CVs (1-2 pages, including  institutional affiliation and contact information) should also be attached. Proposals for individual papers will also be considered and are encouraged. All proposals should be sent by email to BOTH of the Program Co-Chairs for the conference: Professor Robin Burke (rburke@cs.depaul.edu), and Professor Paul B. Jaskot (pjaskot@depaul.edu). Applicants will be informed regarding inclusion on the conference program by October 15, 2013. Registration will be free. Participants and other interested scholars may register beginning in Fall 2013. At that point, information on the venue, detailed program, local arrangements for hotels and other pertinent information will also be available at the DHCS website (http://chicagocolloquium.org/ ). We are very excited about coming together again for an outstanding program. We hope to have as many fields and subject areas represented as possible, and encourage you to start thinking now of putting together sessions, submitting individual papers, or possible workshops for consideration.
