A contagion passed by human contact, such as HIV, MERS, TB, or SARS, spreads through human networks based on how infectious and susceptible each party is. Multiple contacts with infectious people plays a role in the probability of infection. Public health officials perform contact tracing to map the spread of the infection and manage its diffusion. The network below above was created at the epidemiology unit of The Centers for Disease Control [CDC] in the United States.  The network map shows the spread of an airborne infectious disease -- Tuberculosis. The map was created using actual contact tracing data from the community in which the outbreak was occuring.  Contact-tracing Network Map of TB OutbreakBlack nodes are persons with clinical disease (and are potentially infectious), pink nodes represent exposed persons with incubating (or dormant) infection and are not infectious, green represent exposed persons with no infection and are not infectious. The grey nodes have been found to be members of the human network but have not yet been evaluated by medical personnel.Unfortunately the 'social butterfly' in this community, the black node in the center of the network, is also the most infectious -- a super spreader.  Current procedures focus on inoculating the vulnerable -- often the very young and the very old.  Network analysis reveals that it may be smarter, and more efficient, to focus on the spreaders -- those with many contacts to many diverse groups.For more information on how social network analysis [SNA] assists health care professionals to manage and discover contagious disease outbreaks, see this paper I co-authored with the CDC."Transmission Network Analysis to Complement Routine Tuberculosis Contact Investigations"by McKenzie Andre, Kashef Ijaz, Jon D. Tillinghast, Valdis E. Krebs, Lois A. Diem,Beverly Metchock, Theresa Crisp, Peter D. McElroy [PDF]Update: In 2014, this same type of analysis can be applied to the spread of Ebola in Africa.  What currently hampers this effort is the lack of local contact data in the outbreak areas.
