There are only a few more days before the call for Mobility Shifts: An International Future of Learning Summit closes.  Like the previous conference organized by Trebor Scholz on digital labor, The Internet as Playground and Factory, pre-conference discussion is already an important part of the critical discourse around the event, and the mailing list for the Institute for Distributed Creativity is already abuzz with introductions from keynoters like Cathy Davidson of HASTAC. Matt Gold and I are co-chairing the "Digital Fluencies" track at the conference, and we're interested in expanding the meaning of what digital learning means on a very fundamental level to get away from the charity-case after-school computer lab paradigm and the romance with the digital native and to look seriously at forms of learning that involve mobile devices, political engagement, and much more ambiguous narratives.What are new pedagogic approaches for learning with mobile  platforms? What are the limitations of the “digital literacies” paradigm  and its first world/third world assumptions? How do we promulgate digital fluency as an understanding of the  particular features of global information flows in which data,  attention, capital, and reputation might move both to and from  individual actors and communities?  How can mobile media platforms be used for more than the one-way  delivery of  content? What are new pedagogical approaches for real-time  mobile learning that  make full use of the potential of mobile phones,  iPods, laptops, PDAs, smart  phones, Tablet  PCs, and netbooks in formal  and informal contexts? How can global  participants use mobile media to  create rich social contexts around important  learning tasks? How can  such platforms be leveraged to teach digital rights and the  value of  collaboration across cultures?How can we dispel the myth of  the digital native?  How can mobile networks reshape our experiences of space and place  through interactive architecture, locative art, geo-caching games, and  real-time object recognition? What opportunities for networked teaching  and learning might we find in such media-rich, responsive environments? Check out the call for participation here.  The deadline is July 1. (Sixth College is one of the partners of the project and plans to sponsor faculty and TAs from the Culture, Art, and Technology program to attend the event.)
