Wanted to share this final announcement on the Personal Digital Archiving Conference taking place in New York City April 24-26 (next week!). CNI is very pleased to be a supporting organization for this meeting, and I am looking foward to this year’s program. Clifford Lynch Director, CNI ______________ The Personal Digital Archiving Conference 2015 is happy to announce our keynote speakers and scheduled workshops. Registration is still open for this April 24-26 conference. Please register at http://personaldigitalarchiving.com/registration/. OurÂ #PDA15Â keynote speakers: Don PerryÂ – Friday, April 24 @ 9:40am Writer/producer for Chimpanzee Productions, Inc., an independent film and multimedia company dedicated to producing audio-visual experiences that illuminate the human condition and the search for identity, family and spirituality. He co-produced and co-wrote, with Thomas Allen Harris, the NAACP Image Award winner for Outstanding Documentary film, “Through a Lens Darkly: Black Photographers and the Emergence of a People.” Mr. Perry is also an Executive Producer for Digital Diaspora Family Reunion: 1World1Family Roadshow. Howard BesserÂ &Â Rick PrelingerÂ – Saturday, April 25 @ 9:40am Besser is a Professor of Cinema Studies and Associate Director of New York University’s Moving Image Archiving & Preservation Program (MIAP), as well as Senior Scientist for Digital Library Initiatives for NYU’s Library. He teaches Cinema Studies courses on New Media, Installation Art, and the Future of Cinema, and Free Culture & Open Access. In 2009 he was named to the Library of Congress’s select list of “Pioneers of Digital Preservation”. Prelinger is an archivist, associate professor at the University of California, Santa Cruz, writer and filmmaker, and founder of the Prelinger Archives. He partnered with the Internet Archive to make over 6,000 films from Prelinger Archives available online for free viewing, downloading and reuse. Rick is also co-founder (with Megan Prelinger) of the Prelinger Library, a robust mix of eclectic paper-based “orphan” material. With the Voyager Company, a pioneer new media publisher, he produced fourteen LaserDiscs and CD-ROMs with material from his archives. Â The following workshops have been set forÂ Sunday, April 26th: vÂ Â Peter Chan,Â Appraise, Process, Discover & Deliver Email vÂ Â Courtney C. Mumma,Â Archivematica and AtoM: End-to-end digital curation for diverse collections vÂ Â Cal Lee and Kam Woods,Â Curating Personal Digital Archives using BitCurator and BitCurator Access Tools vÂ Â Yvonne Ng, Marie Lascu and Maggie Schreiner,Â Do-It-Yourself Personal Digital Archiving Those who have already registered and indicated interest in workshops will receive further information regarding participation by next week. For further information, keep checking the PDA15 site:Â www.personaldigitalarchiving.com
