The 5th ICTs and Society-Conference: The Internet  and Social Media at a Crossroads: Capitalism or Commonism? Perspectives  for Critical Political Economy and Critical Theory.    http://icts-and-society.net/events/5th-icts-and-society-conference/  Part of the ISIS Summit Vienna 2015: Information Society at the Crossroads: Response and Responsibility of the Sciences of Information. Vienna University of Technology. Vienna, Austria June 3-7, 2015.http://summit.is4is.orghttp://summit.is4is.org/calls/call-for-participation Keynote speakers: http://summit.is4is.org/programme/speakers The  information society has come with the promise  to restore information  as a commons. The promise has not yet proven true. Instead, we face  trends towards the commercialisation and commoditisation of all  information; towards the totalisation of surveillance and the extension  of the battlefield to civil society through information warfare; towards  disinfotainment overflow; towards a collapse of the technological  civilisation itself. The Vienna Summit is a multi-conference and is at the same time the 5th ICTs and Society-Conference: The Internet and Social Media at a  Crossroads: Capitalism or Commonism? Perspectives for Critical Political  Economy and Critical Theory. Given that the information  society and the study of information face a world of crisis today and  are at a crossroads, also the future of the Internet and social media  are in question. The 5th ICTs and Society Conference  therefore wants to focus on the questions: What are the main challenges  that the Internet and social media are facing in capitalism today? What  potentials for an alternative, commonist Internet are there? What are  existing hindrances for such an Internet? What is the relationship of  power structures, protest movements, societal developments, struggles,  radical reforms, etc. to the Internet? How can critical political  economy and critical theory best study the Internet and social media  today? Presentations and submissions are organised in the form of  23 panel topics (ICT&S1-ICT&S23; please indicate the panel  identification number to which you submit in your submisison): * ICT&S1 The Internet and Critical Theory: What does it mean to study the Internet, social media and society today  in a critical way? What are Critical Internet Studies, Critical  Political Economy and Critical Theories of Social Media? * ICT&S2 The Internet, Karl Marx, and Marxist Theory: How can classical forms of critical theory and critical political  economy – e.g. the works of e.g. Karl Marx, the Frankfurt School,  Critical Political Economy of the Media and Communication, Critical and  Marxist Cultural Studies, Socialist Feminism, Theories of Imperialism,  Raymond Williams’ cultural materialism, etc – be used for understanding  the Internet and social media today? * ICT&S3 The Internet, Commodities and Capitalism:What is the role of the Internet and social media in the context of the commodity logic in contemporary capitalism? * ICT&S4 The Political Economy of Online Advertising How can we best critically understand, analyse and combat the role of  advertising on the Internet and the role of online advertising in  capitalism? What are the problems of online advertising culture? How  would a world without advertising and an advertising-free Internet look  like? * ICT&S5 The Internet and Power: How do power structures, exploitation, domination, class, digital  labour, commodification of the communication commons, ideology, and  audience/user commodification, and surveillance shape the Internet and  social media? What is the relationship of exploitation and domination on  the Internet? * ICT&S6 Raymond Williams’ Cultural Materialism and the Internet:How  can we use theoretical insights from Raymond Williams’ cultural  materialism for critically understanding the Internet and social media  today? * ICT&S7 Dallas Smythe and the Internet:How  can we use insights from Dallas Smythe’s political economy of  communication for critically understanding the Internet and social media  today? * ICT&S8 Critical Cultural Studies Today: Stuart Hall, Richard Hoggart and the Internet:What  is the legacy of Stuart Hall and Richard Hoggart’s versions of cultural  studies for critically understanding the Internet? What kind of  cultural studies do we need in the 21st century? And what is  in this context the relationship of culture and capitalism and the  relationship of critical cultural studies to Marxist theory? * ICT&S9 The Frankfurt School and the Internet: How can insights of various generations of the Frankfurt School be used  for critically theorising the Internet? What are commonalities and  differences between a Frankfurt School approach and other forms of  critical theory for understanding the Internet? * ICT&S10 Marxist Semiotics, Marxist Linguistics, Critical Psychology, Marxism and the Internet:How  can Marxist semiotics and Marxist theories of language, information,  psychology and communication (e.g. Ferruccio Rossi-Landi, Valentin  Voloshinov, Klaus Holzkamp, Georg Klaus, Lev Vygotsky, Aleksei Leontiev,  Mikhail Bakhtin, etc.) be used today for critically understanding the  Internet? * ICT&S11 The Internet and Global Capitalism:What  is the role of the Internet and social media in contemporary global  capitalism? What is the role of developing countries, especially Africa,  and emerging economies such as China and India in the world of the  Internet and social media? * ICT&S12 The Internet and Neoliberalism with Chinese Characteristics: Chinese WWW platforms such as Baidu, Taobao, Qq, Sina, Weibo, etc. are  besides Californian platforms the most prominent ones on the web. What  is the role of social media in Chinese capitalism? What is the role of  the Internet in networked working class struggles in China? * ICT&S13 The Political Economy of Digital Labour: What is digital labour and how do exploitation and surplus-value  generation work on the Internet? Which forms of exploitation and class  structuration do we find on the Internet, how do they work, what are  their commonalities and differences? How does the relation between toil  and play change in a digital world? How do classes and class struggles  look like in 21st century informational capitalism? * ICT&S14 The Political Economy of the Internet and the Capitalist State Today: How does the relationship of capitalism, state power, and the Internet  look like today? What is the role of state surveillance and surveillance  ideologies in policing the crisis of capitalism? How does the  relationship of the Internet and state power’s various forms of  regulation, control, repression, violence and surveillance look like and  what is the influence of capitalism on state power and vice versa in  the context of the Internet? * ICT&S15 Ideology Critique 2.0: Ideologies of and on the Internet: What are ideologies of and on the Internet, web 2.0, and social media,  how do they work, and how can they be deconstructed and criticised? * ICT&S16 Hegel 2.0: Dialectical Philosophy and the Internet: What contradictions, conflicts, ambiguities, and dialectics shape 21st  century information society and social media? How can we use Hegel and  Marxist interpretations of Hegel for critically understanding Internet  dialectics? * ICT&S17 Capitalism and Open Access Publishing: What changes has academic publishing been undergoing in contemporary  capitalism? What are the potentials of academic open access publishing  for the re-organisation of the publishing world ? What problems do  non-commercial open access publishing face in capitalism and capitalist  academia? How can these problems be overcome? What are the problems of  capitalist forms of open access publishing? What progressive political  measures and demands should be made in order to foster non-commercial  open access publishing? * ICT&S18 Class Struggles, Social Struggles and the Internet: What is the role of counter-power, resistance, struggles, social  movements, civil society, rebellions, uproars, riots, revolutions, and  political transformations in 21st century information society and how  (if at all) are they connected to social media? What struggles are  needed in order to establish a commonist Internet and a 21st century democratic-commonist society? How can we use critical theory for  interpreting phenomena such as online leaking, Edward Snowden,  WikiLeaks, Wikipedia, federated social networks, Anonymous, hacktivism,  Pirate Parties, privacy advocates, the free/libre/open source (FLOSS)  movement, the open source, open hardware and open content movement,  etc., and what is the relationships of such political expressions to  capitalism, anti-capitalism, liberalism, and socialism? * ICT&S19 Critical/Radical Internet Studies, the University and Academia Today:What  are the challenges and problems for teaching and conducting research  about the Internet a critical and radical perspective? What can be done  to overcome existing limits and problems? * ICT&S20 The Internet and the Left:How could a 21st century Left best look like and what is the role of the Internet for  such a Left? What is the historical, contemporary, and possible future  relationship of Critical Internet Studies and the Left? What is the role  of the Internet in left-wing movements? What problems do such movements  face in relation to the media, communications, the Internet, and social  media? * ICT&S21 Anti-Capitalist Feminism and the Internet Today:What  is the role of and relationship of identity politics and  anti-capitalism for feminist studies of the Internet today? How can we  best study capitalist patriarchy in the context of the Internet and  social media? * ICT&S22 The Internet, Right-Wing Extremism and Fascism Today:How  do far-right movements and parties use the Internet and social media?  How should a left-wing anti-fascist strategy that combats online  right-wing extremism look like? * ICT&S23 An Alternative Internet: What is a commonist/communist Internet? What is an alternative  Internet? What are alternative social media? How do they relate to the  commons and commonism as a 21st century form of communism?  Which problems do alternative Internet platforms face? What needs to be  done in order to overcome these problems? Online SUBMISSION:http://sciforum.net/conference/isis-summit-vienna-2015/ictshttp://sciforum.net/conference/isis-summit-vienna-2015/page/instructions Please submit an extended abstract of 750-2000 words: First register and then select the conference “ISIS Summit Vienna 2015” and the conference stream “ICTS 2015” Only one submission per person will be considered Please indicate the number/ID of the panel to which you are submitting  at the start of your abstract (ICTSxx). Submissions without panel  identifier or that fall outside the topics covered by the 23 panels will  not be further considered. Submission deadline: February 27, 2015 Registration Fee:120 Euros (early bird registration in the ICTs and Society conference stream, registration no later than April 3, 2015) 
