 The NodeXL team seeks qualified full and part time software developers to contribute to the development of the NodeXLÂ application and the NodeXL Graph Gallery web site. NodeXLÂ is sponsored by the Social Media Research Foundation and is a free and open way to get insights into connected structures like networks. Â NodeXL makes it easy to extract networks from many social media platforms, and automatically process the data into a network visualization and report. Â Using NodeXL researchers, scholars, analysts, marketing, PR and event professionals can all easily collect, store, analyze, visualize, and publish reports on social media networks. We seek a skilled developer who can work in a distributed virtual team to maintain end extend the application. Candidates should have the following skills: Required: .NET development skills in C#. Because most of the NodeXL software is written in C#. Required: Basic system administrator skills.Â  Amazon EC2 experience is a plus, but certainly not required. We have three NodeXL EC2 servers that need to be kept up and running.Â  This involves regular server monitoring, backups, Windows updates, increasing disk sizes when necessary, and so on. Desired: Excel programming skills, preferably with Visual Studio Tools for Office (VSTO). TheÂ NodeXL Excel Template uses VSTO.Â  These skills might be hard to come by, though, and any C# programmer should be able to learn the Excel programming model without much difficulty. Desired: MySQL programming and administrator skills. The NodeXL Graph Server runs on MySQL.Â  Bonus: Experience dealing with larger databases.Â  The Graph Server database is approaching half a terabyte, and having someone who knows how to manage that would be a big plus. Desired:Â ASP.NETÂ / HTML / CSS / JavaScript skills. The NodeXL Graph Gallery is implemented in ASP.Net. Desired: SQL Server programming skills. The NodeXL Graph Gallery back end runs on SQL Server. Would be nice: Forum moderation experience. Because people ask lots of questions on the NodeXL CodePlex Discussion board. Interested? Â Email marc@connectedaction.netÂ to submit an application.     
