Jack Delano (FSA/OWI), “Loading oranges into refrigerator car at a co-op orange packing plant,” c. 1939. From the depths of my packing for relocation to Miami, I bring you some questions about the scholarly journal in the age of digital reading. As I go through my bookshelves, I’m confronting an amazing number of issues of scholarly journals that I subscribe to, in paper, and have never had time to read. Even though some of them offer online-only subscriptions, I’ve been partial to receiving the paper journals. There’s utility in an object: it hangs around my house/office, reminding me that I can find out aboutÂ really fascinating new researchÂ if I just take the time to open the journal. But have I actually made time for reading them? Regrettably, no.  Even so, when I start going through the issues, I see at least one item that I think, “Oh, I really want to read that, and this object reminds me that I want to read it.” PDFs on a laptop just don’t have the same physical-reminder value. So I’m having trouble deaccessioning my journals off to the great departmental book-giveaway shelf. I know I can always look up the articles online, but there’s still something seductive about having an unbroken run of a major journal sitting on the shelf.1 Until one finds oneself packing boxes. So, I’d love your comments on any of the following: What do you (personally) do with back issues of scholarly journals, now that you know that you’ll be able to find that article online? If you’re a member of a scholarly society that offers an online-only option for its journal, do you prefer that option? Why or why not? And, more relevant questions for my future, hopefully less-pack-ratty self: What do you (personally) do to keep up with newly published articles in your historical fields or areas of interest? What strategies do you use for making sure you don’t get behind? How do you (personally) take notes on your ongoing scholarly reading when you’re not doing it for a particular research project? I and my aching lower back thank you.   Back-issues of certain subfield journals, like ï»¿GLQï»¿ and Law & History Review, rarely tempt me to weed them from my collection. Topic-focused special issues on things I care about, likewise. Editors, take note. ↩ 
