If we wish to learn from the experience of others, we should acknowledge that making something is more than how the brush meets the canvas or the fingers sit on the fret. A process includes all of the reasons behind the decisions that are made while the brush or fingers move. We can get closer to the wisdom of other people by having them explain their decisions – not just in How they were executed, but Why they were made. This is a higher level of research, one that follows the brush up the hand and to the mind to investigate the motivations and thought processes used so that they can be applied in our own situations. Frank Chimero The Shape of Design   It costs me about $60 to change the oil in my truck, and takes me about 20–30 minutes to do. I still do it, and enjoy doing it, because I now have the space now to do it. If you've never done it, I'd encourage you to, at least once. Learning how to change the oil in your vehicle can give you a new perspective on how your vehicle works. It is certainly easier to drop it off at a shop and have someone change the oil, but doing it yourself affords a new experience that makes the decision to drop it off a bit more informed. You can research different types of oil filters and different types of oil, and may come to realize that the cheap $20 oil change you get at a shop can use sub-optimal supplies. You can learn that its better to not change your oil after you've driven the vehicle around for an hour, because motor oil gets ridiculously hot. You'll learn not to tighten up the filter or the plug for the oil pan too much because the next time you change them, they'll be even more difficult to take off. In short, your relationship with your vehicle is altered, even if just slightly, by this simple but intimate task you've just performed.  But even more revealing, changing the oil in your vehicle can give you a new perspective on people. People who do oil changes for a living, and do other automotive maintenance. People who make motor oil, make filters, make tools to put oil and filters in vehicles. People who recycle used oil and filters. People who design these products. People who design the engines to take these products, use these products better, more efficently. The number of people who touch our lives daily just through the things we use is startling.  A few years ago I likened paying for a WordPress theme paying for an oil change. More specifically, I said I feel about paying for a WordPress theme the same way my dad feels about paying for an oil change. They're not comprable work, certainly. At the time, I wrote that thinking that because I could make my own theme, I wouldn't want to buy one, motivated primary by thrift, and spouted with a touch of arrogance. I've paid for oil changes plenty of times, primarily for the lack of space to do it myself and the convenience. And there's nothing wrong with this at all. I've paid for software lots of times. I would pay for someone to build a website for me, or design a theme for me. I value others' work, and have no qualms in paying for that work or their service.  In general, learning how to do something affords us the perspective to investigate and critique why we do things. It's unreasonable to expect to learn how to do everything on your own, of course, but the opportunities to do so are more prelavent than you might expect. But its less important that you.  The more code I write, the more things I make, the more I realize how connected I am to so many people in the world. With this realization comes a responsibility to learn from the experience of others. Understanding how and why are terrific, but they're not the goal. The goal is to be able to relate to others, to share in some experience however small, to gain some empathy for the perspectives of other people, and to learn from them. It's startling to me how unique each of us is, and how similar we all are at the same time.  In this, I'd like to take Stephen Ramsay’ notion of the “hermeneutics of screwing around” a bit further. Because there are more books than can possibly be read, Ramsay advocates for “screwing around”  As Bethany reminds us on occasion, Jerome McGann liked to think about how scholarship makes an intervention in current scholarly thinking.  But more than simply learning how to do something, and more than learning why we should do or not doing something, we.
