I’m giving a talk next week at the University of Haifa. I’ll try to set up a google hangout on air, but the talk will be in Hebrew (and google translate doesn’t do audio as far as I know). Synopsis: Teacher training and professional development programs aimÂ to provide practitioners with a structured basis of knowledge inÂ psychology, pedagogy and subject matter, which they will apply inÂ their educational work. However, research suggests that practitionersÂ often fail to connect the abstract knowledge they acquire to theconcrete situations in which they work. Consequently, they are leftÂ frustrated with the offerings of educational science, and eventuallyÂ abandon them in favour of what they perceive as good craft. Two emerging approaches try to address this dissonance: TeacherÂ Inquiry and Teachers as Learning Designers. The first applies Dewey’sÂ ideals of inquiry learning to teachers’ professional development, theÂ second follows the constructionist pedagogy of learning by design,Â resonating the ideals of Simon, Schon and Papert. The Design InquiryÂ of Learning (DIL) combines these approaches, by modelling teacherÂ inquiry after the practices and principles of educational design research.Â Learners follow a cycle of (1) defining their project, (2) investigatingÂ the context in which it is situated and identifying appropriate technopedagogicalÂ theories, (3) reviewing relevant cases, (4) conceptualizingÂ a solution, (5) implementing a prototype of that solution, (6) evaluatingÂ it and (7) reflecting on the process. The Learning Design Studio is anÂ implementation of the abstract DIL model which draws on the studioÂ tradition in design education. This talk will present the design inquiry of learning model, and theÂ learning design studio format and review initial empirical results fromÂ their application. I will conclude with some theoretical observationsÂ and consider a possible vision of future classrooms as a designÂ laboratories of learning. Talk Flyer – Design inquiry of learning, the learning design studio,and a vision for future learning and teaching environments (25 Dec. 2013, University of Haifa) 
