I was talking to Steven Warburton the other day. He mentioned that he wanted to present PPW (the Participatory Patterns Workshop) and the LDS (Learning design studio) models at a recent talk he gave, and started thinking about how the two relate to each other. We’ve talked about this in the past, but as always, its only when you need to present something that you really work it out in detail. So Steven came up with this diagram: Steven Warburton’s “Tintin” model of PPW and LDS When he showed it to his audience, someone said “Oh, that’s Tintin!” and so it will be for eternity. I like the picture, although I’ll have to ask Steven to walk me through it before I can explain it properly. This got me thinking about the commonalities, synergies and differences between the two frameworks.  Participatory Pattern Workshops (PPW) Learning Design Studio (LDS) Is a… Methodology for collaborative reflection on practice. Originally conceived as a device for educational design research, aimed at eliciting expert knowledge and structuring it in the form of design narratives, patterns and scenarios. Through use, emerged as a powerful form of professional development. Methodology for Design Inquiry of Learning. Developed explicitly as a device for supporting educational practitioners in their professional development through active inquiry of techno-pedagogical innovations. Suitable for… Domain experts, seasoned practitioners, multi-disciplinary expert teams. Novices or experienced practitioners who wish to engage with new pedagogies or technologies or both. Mood.. Reflective, semi-structured, analytical, critical Creative, productive, intuitive, iterative, emergent Outputs.. Transferable educational design knowledge in the form of design narratives, design patterns, design scenarios, and theoretical contributions. Application of design knowledge in the form of documented and evaluated educational innovations. I would be interested to hear from people who participated in workshops and courses based on these models how this maps to their experiences. Mor, Y. & Mogilevsky, O. (2013), ‘The Learning Design Studio: Collaborative Design Inquiry as Teachers’ Professional Development’,Â Research in Learning TechnologyÂ 21Â http://www.researchinlearningtechnology.net/index.php/rlt/article/view/22054 (researchgate) Mor, Y. & Mogilevsky, O. (2013), Learning design studio: educational practice as design inquiry of learning ‘Scaling up Learning for Sustained Impact’ , LNCS,Â 8095,Â Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 233-245 (researchgate) Mor, Y.; Winters, N. & Warburton, S. (2012), ‘Participatory Pattern Workshops: A Methodology for Open Collaborative Construction of Design Knowledge in Education’,Â Research in Learning TechnologyÂ 20Â http://www.researchinlearningtechnology.net/index.php/rlt/article/view/19197Â (researchgate) 
