Welcome to the 52nd History Carnival! This will be (for me, anyways) the end-of-the-semester edition, an edition that I would enjoy to relax and reflect after a long but productive semester of teaching, researching, coding, CSSing, Photoshop mocking uping, and various other sundry things. So, I hope you can sit back and and enjoy some great posts from the last month.  The Carnival  Kids and History  We'll start out with my favorite post from this month, by Tim Abbott. Reflecting on his historical interests as a kid, Abbott does "Paul Phillipoteaux one better" with magic markers as he discusses his own cyclorame of the battle of Gettysburg in Cyclorama in Newsprint.  At History is Elementary, "elementaryhistoryteacher" recounts how she teaches the history of political parties to her students in "13 Things about Political Parties in the U.S."  Dog History  We should take some time to consider the history of our beloved pets, especially dogs. Natalie Bennett explains why buying a dog in nineteenth-century London did not come without problems in "A fit companion for a duchess". Elizabeth Chadwick's "Caveat Canem!" discusses the kinds of dogs around Britain in 1066.  Found History  If Tom's shown me anything, it's that we can find history almost anywhere. And gladly wolde (s)he lerne points out some "Medievalist in Training" t-shirts in "Celebration and a T-shirt." The shirts come in a variety of sizes and colors. Perfect for that hard-to-by-for medievalist student you know.  Looking at how history is inspiration, Laura Scime at anEndlessArray sees a connection between the design aesthetic of today's Web 2.0 look (see Patahistory 2.0) and 1980s design in "Lego my Logo: Web 2.0 and 1980s Branding Aesthetics."  Ancient and Medieval  Jarod Kearney explains the history of May Day in May Day: Pagans, Christians, and a Whole Lot of Pole-Dancing.  Judith Weingarten at Zenobia: Empress of the East has an interesting series on "The Four Julia's," which includes "More Uppity Women: the 4 Julia's (Part IV)" and "More Uppity Women: the 4 Julia's (Part IV) ... continued".  Gillian Polack at Food History tries to convince people that medieval did not live off of or hide rancid food in "Food poisoning, rotten food and general bad temper."  War and Society  Some bloggers this month have written on various contexts and implications of war. Romeo Vitelli's post on Action T4 discusses the Nazi eugenics program that initially euthanized disable children (with the cooperation of parents). While the program formally ended in 1941, Vitelli argues that it was an "important first step" in the Nazi "Final Solution."  Looking at the Allied side during WWII, Brett Holman highlights the experiences of an Australian soldier's first impressions of wartime Britain in "An Anzac on England". The soldier, Sydney Melbourne (supposedly a pseudonym), wondered about Britain's idle farm land and was struck by the lack of "civic pride" in a London filled with dirt.  Lastly, Mike Antonucci looks at the Falklands War between Argentina and Britain in a nice series of posts, the latest of which is "Falklands Aftermath". Some other posts from the same series include and "Sometimes the Wrong Approach is the Right Approach" and "Argentine Errors". The battle over the Falkland Islands was 25 years ago, and Antonucci's is a series of posts on the conflict and its history.  Digital Humanities  Historians grapple with the implications of digitization and access to information. Sarah at Order and Access asks "What is lost and what is gained in the digitizing of collections?" Rob Townsend at the American Historical Association Blog also addresses that question with regard to Google Books. Rob's "Google Books: What's Not to Like?" offers a balanced critique of Google's online digital book service.  Gavin Robinson indirectly addresses digitization by using Flickr in some interesting ways. His "Great War photos on Flickr" explains how historians can do some pretty useful things with images in a Flickr account. There's lots of good history on Flickr, as Gavin shows us.  Rob MacDougall tackles the concept of history appliances in "History and Appliances: I Love the Gilded Age" and "History and Appliances: The Case for Luddism". The last one is a response to William Turkel's "Luddism is a Luxury You Can't Afford".  Dave Davisson elaborates on the implications of all this crazy web stuff for historians in his "Digital History in the Twenty-First Century: An Introduction to History 2.0".  Ideologies, Perspectives, Theories  Gus diZerega critiques the "moral and political meltdown" of classical liberalism in "Progressivism and the fate of Liberalism".  Barista discusses "living in yesterday's tomorrow," a list of predictions that Ladies Home Journal in 1902 predicted would change by 2002. Some are right on, others are right off, but its incredible and revealing to critique how the past predicted the future.  And even though we got a fair bit on Foucault in the last carnival, I'll admit that I can't get enough. The Valve keeps the Foucault conversation going with "The Warden Will See You Now, Mr. Foucault" and Jeremy at Foucault Blog discusses an important term for Foucault: "Problematization".  Reviews  The month of April was a good month for reviews of all kinds: books, television, websites. Here are a few highlights: Kevin M. Levin reviews some History Channel fare in "This Isn't Your Grandmother's W.T. Sherman: A Review of the History Channel's 'Sherman's March'".  Otto Pohl writes "Review of Sidonia Dedina's Edvard Benes: The Liquidator: Fiend of the German Purge" The Little Professor critiques William St. Clair's The Reading Nation in the Romantic Period in "Writers, Readers, and Reputations: Literary Life in Britain 1870-1918".  Kate Brown at World History Blog reviews two books on "Executing Women in Ohio", both of which expose the rarely-discussed topic of women on death row.  Ben Vershbow at if:book provides a thorough critique of the new harpers.org website.  Finally, Sepoy provides a very good discussion of William Dalrymple's The Last Mughal in "1857 and Dalrymple's The Last Mughal", which generated some great discussion in the comments.  Violence and Crimes  Before the events at Virginia Tech on April 16, "Yetimonk" published "A Jigsaw of School Shootings," a very thoughful piece on the relatively history of school shootings.  "The Torch Killer, or the Wickedest Stepmother Ever" by Laura James resurrects and analyzes a forgotten murder case.  Shaheen Lakhan adds a historical and psychological perspective to war in general in "Is war a psychosis?", while Elder of Ziyon discusses  "April, 1948: How the Arabs left Tiberias".  Memory and History  How do memory and history intersect? How do we use memory for historical purposes? In some cases, we go to museums and historical places to remember, or at least get as close to a personal memory as possible from a site or recreation. Greg King discusses "The Monitor Center" in Virginia, while Kristan Tetens elaborates on the the Indian governments plans to organize events and programs related to the 150th anniversary of the Uprisng of 1857 (or the Sepoy Rebellion) in "1857--2007". and discusses other "odds and ends." At All Things Pakistan, Adil Najam elaborates on the "The Treasures of Takht-i-Bahi".  In other cases, parties want to deliberately forget or choose to interpret history in advantageous ways. Jeremiah at Jottings from the Granite Studio critiques the People's Republic of China's notion that Tibet was historically a part of China. "Protests at the Roof of the World, Bad History, and a new PR strategy for the P.R.C". Jeremiah notes that China's decision to take the Olympic torch to the summit of Mount Everest is "provocative" and highlights China's shaky history in justifying its borders and territorial claims.  Specifically regarding Virginia Tech, Sheila Brennan speculates on how tragedy changes our view of technology in "Technology in Tragedy," while Mills Kelly discusses the April 16 Archive that the folks at Virginia Tech's Center for Digital Discourse and Culture are running.  At a more personal level, Nathanael Robinson's "My 1992" discusses some important questions about personal associations to historical events, particularly those involving Rodney King verdict and ensuing riots in Los Angeles. Nathanael believes "historical memory is seldom personal memory," and his post really makes me think about my personal perspective and memories of historical events.  Next Time  I hope you've enjoyed it! And be sure to look out for great blogging in the month of May. The host for the June 1 edition will be the American Presidents Blog. Please send nominations to them through the carnival nomination form.
